0||Justify wins muddy Kentucky Derby as Mendelssohn falls short – as it happenedSo, disappointment for Mendelssohn but a huge new star of American racing in Justify, a horse with a huge future and a very live tilt at the Triple Crown in front of him. As a son of Scat Daddy, he is also now worth a staggering amount of money as a stallion prospect, whatever else he does. Quite a day for a crowd of 157,813 to look back on as they head out into the gathering gloom and look forward to a change of clothes. Thanks for sharing it with me, this is Greg Wood at Churchill Downs, signing off. Here’s Mike Smith: My job was just to get him out of there. Once we jumped well, I basically stepped out of the way and kept a leg on each side and my mind out of the way. Bob Baffert is (finally) here: He broke clean, and I knew that he wasn’t going to lay down. It’s like having LeBron James on your team, you’d better win a championship with him. The main players will be in the interview room shortly, quotes will follow. Mendelssohn was last across the line, Ryan Moore accepted the inevitable before they had reached the far turn but it was really lost at the start. He looked as though he took a bump too as Moore tried his best to find some sort of a position, but to no avail. A race that was run in awful conditions but Justify fully lived up to his billing from Bob Baffert as the possible successor to his Triple Crown winner, American Pharoah. He looked the winner from the moment he hit the front and will now be a very short price for the Preakness Stakes, the next leg of the Triple Crown. It is certainly difficult to see any of today’s rivals overturning the form at Pimlico. Good Magic was second, Audible third, Instilled Regard fourth and My Boy Jack fifth. A long way to come for a muddy disappointment, but Justify was a ready winner, he took it up a long way out and has finally beaten the Curse of Apollo. Mendelssohn never threatened sadly. Photo for second, Audible and Good Magic. Justify wins! Justify leads around the home turn, from Bolt Dorof Really fast second quarter too Justify moving up Only a fair break by Mendelssohn, a very fast pace led by Promise Fulfilled Off and running “Let’s go Mendelssohn” is the cry from just behind me. The first few are in. Now they approach the starting gate .... Apologies to At The Races viewers, who must have thought there was a hell of a delay on their coverage. Correction, they are not quite starting to load, though post time was a minute ago. They are starting to load for the 144th Kentucky Derby. Come on Ryan. He’s from Brighton too, y’know. And now some Fat Boy Slim. They must know I’m from Brighton. I will have my binoculars focused on stall 14 as they open and do all I can to describe the Greatest Two Minutes In Sport as it’s happening. The Final Countdown blares out across Churchill Downs, in less than 10 minutes, one of these 20 horses will be in the history books. Going down to the gates. Mendelssohn got a huge cheer too, a lot of people here would love to see a first winner for Europe The horses are parading in front of the stand and being introduced to the crowd. A huge cheer for My Boy Jack. The roar that ripped through Churchill as the bugler sounded Reveille was blood-curdling, while my new friend Crow is currently dabbed away the tears thanks to a wonderful rendition of My Old Kentucky Home. Bit teary myself, never though I’d be here to hear it. Laila Ali, the daughter of Louisville-born Muhammed Ali, has just announced “Rider’s Up”. And they are! There is an argument at least that Moore may try to ride Mendelssohn a bit closer to the pace that might otherwise be the case, but plenty of other riders are likely to be thinking the same thing as they try to avoid getting buried in a slop-storm on the inside. The last five favourites have won here, but these conditions must make an outsider winning more likely. Mendelssohn very steady in the betting at 6-1, but there’s little doubt Justify is going to start favourite from seven. How will Ryan Moore have plotted this out? He would probably have had quite a few ideas in his head, but has he had to junk the lot as a result of the rain? Mendelssohn is on the big screen being led into his saddling barn, and the jockeys are leaving the jockeys’ room. Still the rain comes down. That stat about it never having rained during the Kentucky Derby itself is looking very down in the mouth. The runners in the Kentucky Derby are making their way across from the barns. Just been down to the parade ring for a quick chat with Aidan O’Brien, who is, understandably, still buzzing after his son Donnacha’s win on Saxon Warrior in the 2,000 Guineas earlier. He’s as much in the dark as anyone about Mendelssohn’s ability to handle the slop. You just wouldn’t know. We took him to Dubai to prepare him for the dirt, and now it’s completely different. [But] he’s an unusual horse with a big personality, and when you put the blinkers on him, his focus changes completely Nice line: The serious buildup to the 144th Kentucky Derby starts here. The rain is a big unknown for Mendelssohn as it is for most of the runners in the race, but it has to be a particular concern for his supporters as he floated over the fast dirt at Meydan in March. The track TV has just shown the “Puppy Predictor” for this year’s Kentucky Derby, which runs on a late-night talk show. About 15 puppies race over what looks around 10 feet to reach a tray of dog biscuits, and apparently, the puppy representing subsequent Triple Crown winner American Pharoah was the winner in 2015. This year’s winner according to puppy lore? It’s Mendelssohn. Yoshida has just won the Turf Classic for Bill Mott and Jose Ortiz, and the rain is still coming down. The runners are out on the track for the Turf Classic, the last race before the Kentucky Derby itself, although there are all sorts of traditions to run through before the big race itself at 23.46 British time (18.46 here). I met an extremely pleasant chap called Crow Hollister while having breakfast in a local cafe this morning. He’s a Louisville native and made it plain how much this race means to the city and the state. The whole place stops at post time, everyone is in front of a screen if they’re not at the track and as he put it, it would be great to be hovering above Louisville to hear the roar that goes up from every corner of this city of 1.2m when the gates crash open and the field sets off. He also admits that he still gets misty-eyed when the crowd sings “My Old Kentucky Home” with the horses heading for the gates. That will, as always, be quite a moment, and it is now scarcely an hour away. Oh, and they were also stopping people bringing in umbrellas at the gate before racing. There is a huge umbrella graveyard somewhere nearby. Odd thing about all the rain is that it wasn’t forecast at all, even yesterday afternoon there was some confidence that there might be the odd shower but nothing too serious. The previous record for the wettest Derby day ever, incidentally, was apparently in 1918, so here’s an early warning to racegoers in 2118 to be sure to pack a raincoat. This is now, officially, the wettest Kentucky Derby ever, with 2.31 inches of inch so far today. Another runner in the big one that deserves a mention is My Boy Jack (stall 10, 5-1), as his current odds are well below the “morning line” prediction of 30-1. That may just mean that the early punters all know someone called Jack, as the serious money has yet to hit the pools, but he was tipped up by a few decent judges as likely to finish strongly through tiring horses from off the pace. as he did here in the Stonestreet at Lexington. Vino Rosso (stall 18, 14-1) is an interesting runner in the big one, as John Velazquez had a few options and came down in favour of the Wood Memorial winner. And three lengths behind Vino Rosso here is Enticed (stall 12, 55-1), who runs for Godolphin’s US operation overseen by Kiaran McLoughlin. Good Magic’s latest run was an improvement on his start behind Promises Fulfilled (stall three, 46-1) in the Fountain of Youth at Gulfstream on 3 March. Good Magic (stall 6, 9-1) took last year’s Breeders’ Cup Juvenile, with Bolt D’Oro, who set off as the hot favourite, back in third. The track here at Churchill Downs is now officially “sloppy”, and the big outsider Funny Duck just took the Pat Day Mile on the dirt with Seahenge &amp; Ryan Moore out of the frame. Some more form from YouTube. Audible, currently a 6-1 chance to win from stall five, beat Hofberg, (25-1, stall nine) in the Florida Derby on 31 March. It was only the third start of Hofberg’s career and personally I have a feeling he might get a fair bit closer to Audible today. Don’t cry for me, David Johnson. I’m loving every minute. On the subject of HST’s day out at the Derby with Ralph Steadman, here’s a piece in the Courier Journal this week where they caught up with the artist to talk about his somewhat hazy memories of the 1970 Kentucky Derby. Went for a walk on the infield earlier (thankfully before the worst of the rain) to see if it bears any resemblance to the scene depicted in Hunter S Thompson’s famous piece “The Kentucky Derby is Decadent and Depraved”. There were plenty of moderately offensive bespoke suits in outlandish colours and designs but nothing too debauched, though it was early and I can’t imagine what it must be like out there now after several inches of rain. A proper gonzo journalist would head out there and wade in. I’m happier being non-gonzo and (relatively) dry. On with the form guide. Todd Pletcher’s Magnum Moon, who will break from stall 16, is, like Justify, trying to brake the so-called Curse of Apollo. He was the last horse to win without running as a juvenile, back in 1882. Whatever you think of stats, that’s quite a stat. Here he is winning the Arkansas Derby, with Solomini, who is drawn in 17 today, back in third. Deauville, one of Ryan Moore’s three rides on the undercard before the Kentucky Derby, has been scratched from the Turf Classic. Just went for a quick spin around the paddock. There are racegoers taking bets on whether they can jump puddles without getting their feet wet, and there are enough around to construct a entire Grand National course of puddles should you so wish. There’s a monster near the parade ring that would be a very daunting Chair. Justify, meanwhile, put up two of the best Beyer figures of the year in his first two starts this year, which were also the first two runs of his career, and then established himself as the likely favourite today with an easy win in the Santa Anita Derby on 7 April, where Bolt D’Oro, who is also in today’s field, was three lengths away in second. US fans are a little unsure what to make of Mendelssohn’s romp in the desert, not least after Rayya, the runner-up, completely failed to fire in the Kentucky Oaks here on Friday. But the time guru Andy Beyer put a figure of 106 on it, which is just 1lb behind Justify, the favourite, and Mendelssohn also has winning form in the States in last year’s Breeders’ Cup Juvenile Turf, where the beaten horses included Masar, who was third in today’s 2,000 Guineas. Three hours to the off for the 144th Kentucky Derby and here’s the first of the video form for tonight’s big race. Mendelssohn’s romp in the UAE Derby seemed extraordinary at the time and still looks fairly remarkable when you look at it again a few weeks later. Threeandfourpence, Ryan Moore’s first ride for Aidan O’Brien here today, was never a factor and out of the frame behind Maraud (Todd Pletcher/John Velasquez). Hello from a decidedly damp Churchill Downs racecourse in Louisville, Kentucky, where steady – and at times torrential – rain has been an unwelcome addition to what is, without any doubt, one of the great occasions in any sport. It is not just a horse race, it is a national and international event which permeates the consciousness of pretty much everyone, in terms of an awareness that it exists at any rate. The Kentucky Derby stars in films, books and popular culture. Like the Grand National, people just know about it. For European racing fans, this year’s race is mostly about Mendelssohn, the 18-and-three-quarter length winner of the UAE Derby last time out and the most credible transatlantic contender for the Run For The Roses for at least 26 years. For the Americans, though, this is the final stop at the end of a traditional four-month trail that leads through trial events in Florida, Arkansas, New York, California and Kentucky towards what they like to call, with some justification, “the most exciting two minutes in sports”. And this year’s renewal is, by fairly general consent, one of the best for years, with no significant absentees among the main trial winners and Justify, who may shade Mendelssohn for favouritism, touted as a potential superstar by Bob Baffert, his trainer. Baffert, of course, prepared American Pharoah to win the first Triple Crown for 37 years in the 2015 season, and has been unstinting in his admiration for Justify, who is, like Mendelssohn, a son of the late stallion Scat Daddy. Scat Daddy’s final crop of yearlings went through the ring last year and fetched some astonishing prices as buyers fought to take their last chance to buy a piece of his genes. As was the case when Galileo eventually taking over the mantle of Europe’s top stallion from his own sire, Sadler’s Wells, a Derby-winning son of Scat Daddy would command a huge fee at stud and for all the tradition, history and glory attached to a win today, there is potentially a staggering amount of money at stake as well. As mentioned earlier, the weather here at Churchill is nothing like the warm temperatures and clear skies that were forecast just a couple of days ago (by my weather app, at any rate). There was a slight but steady drizzle in the early part of the morning, and then a proper downpour which started about three hours ago (17.30 BST), and while it has eased off somewhat since, the dirt track – which was officially “fast” this morning – is now described as “muddy” and has been sealed (which basically means compacted to keep it as even as possible. The racing here has been underway for nearly six hours – there are 14 races in all, with the 144th Kentucky Derby at number 12 – and Ryan Moore is due out imminently to ride Threeandfourpence for Aidan O’Brien in the Grade Two American Turf. He also rides Seahenge – like Mendelssohn, a son of Scat Daddy – over a mile on dirt at 4.28 local time (21.28 BST), and Deauville in the $1m Old Forester Turf Classic (10.25 BST) before climbing aboard Mendelssohn when the traditional “Riders Up” call goes out about 15 minutes before the off for the big one. The on-track betting for the big race is relatively unaffected by the changing conditions, with Mendelssohn currently showing as a 6-1 chance behind the 7-2 favourite, Justify. Mendelssohn’s odds with British books range from 3-1 to 5-1 and they are probably looking at quite a few tasty doubles after his stable companion Saxon Warrior took the 2,000 Guineas at Newmarket earlier today. I’ll be posting plenty of YouTube video form for the big-race contenders shortly if you are hoping to make up your mind which way to jump. An enthralling few hours lie ahead with a potential moment of horse racing history in the offing and I’m very much looking forward to sharing it with you.
1||‘I got a bit terrified’: Simon Baker on filming Tim Winton’s Breath“I’ve done a lot of work as an actor making a living that I’m not necessarily proud of, and I’d be quite happy if it just sort of disappeared, to be honest,” Simon Baker confesses. “I wanted something that might last a bit longer.” The actor is best known in Australia for his television work, on procedural The Mentalist and drama The Guardian, but he’s currently promoting his feature film directorial debut: a big-screen adaptation of Tim Winton’s controversial novel Breath, in which he also stars. • Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon “A lot of the roles that I’ve played, where they’re – on paper – only two dimensional [or] they’re not that rich, it’s because they’re generally devices,” he explains. Diplomatically, he doesn’t point fingers. “Often it doesn’t matter how much you bring to it; it’s just going to become what it is. That’s where being the director is a bit more interesting, because you can flush out the nuance and the detail.” Set in 1970s Western Australia and shot in the coastal town of Denmark, Baker’s flick hews closely to Winton’s text. It follows Pikelet (Samson Coulter) and Loonie (Ben Spence) over a formative few years as they get taken in under the wing of the ageing surf legend Sando (Baker), and grow enraptured with Sando’s troubled wife, Eva (Elizabeth Debicki). Coulter and Spence were both amateur actors selected for their surfing ability, captured stunningly by water cinematographer Rick Rifici. When Sando and Loonie head off on a surfing adventure without Pikelet, the teen finds comfort in Eva’s bed. She later raises the stakes in a manner that gives grave meaning to the title, pulling out a pink plastic bag and strap for Pikelet to affix to her head. Having been written by Winton, the novel has plenty of local lingo – “ducks nuts” gets a guernsey twice – and reflects warmly yet solemnly on the loss of innocence. It confronts male identity and has its protagonist reckon with a fear of ordinariness and a very confused sexual awakening. But in WA – where Winton lives and where nine of his texts are on the year 12 syllabus – Breath is known for one thing specifically: Eva’s dangerous infatuation with breath play, a taboo act that requires Pikelet to strangle or suffocate her during sex. In the novel, Eva’s asphyxiophilia – or arousal through oxygen deprivation – is written as an eye-watering blow-by-blow account, with Pikelet describing the “evil, crinkly sound of the bag and the smeary film of her breath inside it”. But for the film, Baker edited the sequences elliptically, not showing much at all. He put a number of other sex scenes aside, while toning down the ferocity with which Pikelet takes to his task. (“I gently throttled her,” remembers Pikelet, as an older man in Winton’s book.) Baker spent a long time thinking about how he’d approach the scenes. “There was a while there where I considered not even showing the bag over her head,” he says, before describing the shot order in precise detail, to emphasise that the remaining “two-second shot” and the suggestive images that follow are “far more potent”. “In the book, it really goes there in a lot of ways, because you can do that in a book,” he says. “You don’t have to worry about ratings, you don’t have to worry about what’s going to turn an audience off.” By side-stepping the titular act, the film was awarded an M rating, which will mean it can still be studied in schools. “With the book, it’s black ink on a white page, and you paint the picture and you join the dots yourself,” Baker says. “But, on a 30-foot screen, it’s there in front of you, and it can be far more confronting without a word spoken.” Another omission in the film is the book’s tragic prologue and epilogue, featuring an adult Pikelet – now a paramedic haunted by his past and present kinks – encountering not one but two deaths by autoerotic asphyxiation. Instead, Baker keeps Breath planted in the 1970s. “It’s just not going to work in a film,” he says of the excised chapters. “I wanted to make a film that, when you watched it, it felt like you felt when you read the book, as opposed to a checklist of literal translation of what the book is to the film. It wouldn’t make a good film if you just went through the book and put all the points down.” The idea of adapting Breath first came to producer Mark Johnson, who thought of Baker for the character of Sando, based on his heritage, history and love of surfing. Baker’s initial plan to simply produce alongside Johnson proved unsatisfying after he read the book and found himself ensnared. “Normally, whenever I read anything that was related to surfing at all, I’d run a mile from it, because it always – in script form – felt a bit corny or cheesy,” he says. But after a few meetings with prospective directors, Johnson finally asked Baker if he was keen to take the helm: “I thought you’d never ask,” Baker says with a laugh. Approaching the text, Baker was driven mostly by a fear of failing it. Like Pikelet, he was reckoning with the elemental fear of ordinariness. “[Before production began] I got a bit terrified and started to consider backing out of it, pulling out of it or just letting it fade away,” Baker admits. He confided in his wife, telling her: “I’m scared that I can’t make the film the way I want to make the film; as good as I want it to be.” “[Winton’s] book is intact as a beautiful piece of work,” he says. “I could come unstuck and make a terrible movie completely, but I just needed to know I was free to go and do that. [Winton] was completely accommodating. He completely understood and he said, ‘you go mate, you go ahead and do it’.” “I’m really proud of this movie and I still sort of pinch myself that we were able to pull it off at all. What I wanted to do with this movie [is] try to make a film that had a bit more longevity and, for my own personal satisfaction, [had] some kind of a legacy that I felt proud of.” • Breath is in Australian cinemas now • This article was amended on 9 May 2018. An earlier version referred to “autoerotic asphyxiation” in the subheading. This has been corrected to “erotic asphyxiation”.
2||For the recordPerhaps a printer’s devil tempted us to give Anthony as the first name of San Francisco-based satanic guru, Anton LaVey (“Siren, satanist or comic genius? The many myths of Jayne Mansfield”, News, last week, page 14). Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736
3||Letters: heroin abuse is a public health issueYour special report “Death by the sea: how drugs blighted our coastal towns”, News) raises once again the issue of the appalling death rates from heroin usage. I was struck by the statement that the Royal College of Physicians has declared that the problem must be seen as a public health rather than a criminal justice issue. As a (now retired) GP, and since the deaths in the 1980s of four young patients from heroin overdose in our small market town, I cry: “At last!” Most of us take mood-altering substances, whether alcohol, nicotine or heroin. They are all dangerous, but by treating, for example, tobacco as a public health problem, look at the impact on pubs, the workplace, public transport etc. Bringing heroin into the public health arena and out of the criminal justice system would have an immense impact on crimes related to drugs and prison populations and death rates, particularly among the young, would fall. What government will have the courage to introduce controlled legalisation of drug use, as the Portuguese and Norwegians have done to remarkable effect? Nick Maurice Marlborough, Wiltshire Getting a grip on wind power Regarding the article “Powerful case for UK to get on board with onshore windfarms”, (Business leader), before onshore wind farms are so enthusiastically encouraged by the Welsh government and others, several matters need to be addressed: having moved larger turbines from hills to the settled lowlands, developers need better advice on scale and siting, with a restraint on their urge for the largest turbines; the public need to see tighter controls set over adverse impacts and we need timely enforcement of the conditions. Turbines are sometimes hugely out of scale and so badly sited that they leave residents with a degraded quality of life. We have found that conditions on noise levels can be sidestepped by tweaking turbines during a test period. Since we, the public, pay for the electricity produced out of our high energy bills, and thus public funding is involved, we would like to see any increase in onshore wind accompanied by a guarantee that the size, siting and operation of schemes will be better controlled, that conditional planning consent will mean what it says and that conditions will be enforceable and enforced in a timely manner. Mary-Rose Sinclair Chair of the Pembrokeshire Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales Narberth, Pembrokeshire Generations should unite Rather than pitting generations against each other (“Millennials are suffering… is it really the baby boomers’ fault?”, Focus, last week), economic and social policies and programmes should unite all ages. Everyone should have the chance to work, somewhere decent to live and support for families with caring responsibilities. Underpinning action on homes, care and jobs should be fair taxation, shifting the balance from taxing income to taxing wealth. Taking care of all generations highlights our interdependence. Let’s focus on what unites us – our mutual hopes and concerns; prevention being better than cure; technology working for all; support throughout life; and giving power to people. Enabling older and younger people to mix more would help increase mutual understanding and develop common solutions. We can create a Britain for all ages. To make progress, we need leadership and a new spirit in Britain that uses the assets and the contributions of citizens of all ages. Stephen Burke Director, United for All Ages Rewriting Spanish history Those fighting for a historic Spanish image makeover (“Spain fights to dispel legend of Inquisition and imperial atrocities”, World) would struggle to gloss over Charles Darwin’s observation of the Spanish methods of colonisation of South America at the time of his journey on horseback from the Plata to Buenos Aries in the late 1830s. He wrote in The Voyage of the Beagle: “This is a dark picture; but how much more shocking is the unquestionable fact, that all [Indian] women who appear above twenty years old are massacred in cold blood! When I exclaimed that this appeared rather inhuman, he [Spanish Lieutenant] answered, ‘Why, what can be done? They breed so!’ ” Darwin asks: “Who would believe in this day and age that such atrocities could be committed in a Christian civilised country?” Does the Hispanic Civilisation Foundation have an answer? Margaret Eason Darlington Night nannies for all Having worked as a health visitor for 30 years, I have seen the exhaustion experienced as a result of sleep-deprivation after the birth of a baby (“The new Mary Poppinses: night nannies are wealthy mothers’ latest must-have”, Focus). This is a major contributory factor to the failure to establish or continue breast feeding, feelings of depression and can lead to family breakdown. It would seem that the “must-have of the night nannies”, if available to all for the first six weeks, would be a very cost-effective way of promoting health and supporting all families. Barbara Small Norwich Actions and words Please can Jonathan Bouquet turn his attention to the use of adjectival words to categorise people (“May I have a word?” Comment)? I thought progress was being made, as we seldom hear references to “the disabled” or “the blind”. Recently, I have heard a lot about “illegals”, as in “this country is overrun with “illegals”. Actions can be illegal, people never. Alison Evans Dewsbury, West Yorkshire Unjust deserts Will Hutton concludes his depressing article on the consequences of our leaving the EU by writing that “our country needs and deserves better” (“Struggle as I may, I can find no grounds for optimism on the economy”, Comment). We “need” to be rescued from the folly of the referendum result and cannot be said to “deserve” it. Another sage observed that in countries with democratic rule, people deserve the government for which they vote. Martin Smith Felixstowe, Suffolk Fallacies of the Brexit vote No, Mrs May, in voting to leave the EU, the British people didn’t vote “to leave the single market and the customs union” (“Mrs May’s attempt to muddle through Brexit is fast approaching crunch time”, Andrew Rawnsley, Comment). They couldn’t. The government denied them the option. Its official guidance explicitly distinguished between the EU and the single market as separate entities. Leaving the EU, it said, risked only losing “full” and enjoying “less” – not all – access to the single market, a potentially important factor for many voters. The ballot paper then offered a choice, in what the government had presented as “a once in a generation decision”, on staying in or leaving only the EU. For Mrs May to presume that voters would also have decided to leave the single market is an abuse of democratic process. She should reread and honour the government’s published confirmation of continued access. David Crawford Norwich One TSB problem solved Questions are justifiably being asked about TSB and what it stands for (“Don’t look so worried, Paul. TSB’s tech glitch will be resolved. Eventually”, Business leader). It seems to me that the late Denis Healey was his usual prescient and succinct self on the matter: the silly billies. Mike Pender Cardiff
1||New kids on the Croisette: Cannes’ stars of the futureIt was with that distinctively French manner of casual, even shrugging, hyperbole that the Cannes film festival director, Thierry Frémaux, prefaced the announcement of this year’s lineup by promising “a great renewal of a generation”. He sounded, as is his wont, unfussed about this and, in turn, those listening at the press conference could understandably have dismissed the boast as a hollow one. Isn’t Cannes more or less the same every year, after all? The roster of high-minded films from brand-name auteurs mixed in with the annual concession to blockbuster celebrity-bait takes a similar shape from one edition to the next. The parties and premiere photos are all but interchangeable across the years. The controversies, too, are more or less fixed in place: every year you can count on headlines about gratuitous provocations on screen, press conference gaffes, booing in the aisles, the paucity of female film-makers in the programme, and the sartorial sexism of the rigid red-carpet dress code. Journalists covering the festivals are constantly checking they haven’t reused last year’s bon mots; a four-year cycle, at least, seems more or less reasonable. Yet once Frémaux had unveiled his 2018 selection, eyebrows remained largely raised. European Twitter wags gleefully declared a “Frémauxcalypse”; many Americans were left bewildered. “Seriously?” shrieked the reactionary Hollywood blogger Jeffrey Wells, swiftly declaring the lineup, sight unseen, the worst in memory. “I get the overwhelming feeling we’re being punished for something,” half-joked New York Magazine’s Emily Yoshida. Over in London, Mike Leigh, a former Palme d’Or winner, might have wondered something similar. His forthcoming historical epic, Peterloo, widely seen as a sure bet for the Cannes competition, had been passed over – the most surprising of several high-profile auteur omissions whose films had been seen and assessed by Frémaux’s selection committee. Italy’s Paolo Sorrentino, whose last six films all competed at Cannes, was frozen out with his Berlusconi biopic, Loro. Japan’s Naomi Kawase, a mainstay of the festival since winning the Camera d’Or for her 1997 debut, Suzaku, was left off the list too, despite the Cannes-friendly presence of Juliette Binoche in her latest, Vision. Meanwhile, Claire Denis, a critics’ darling who somehow hasn’t been in competition at Cannes since 1988, was widely expected to break the hex with High Life, a sci-fi film starring Robert Pattinson. Frémaux had other ideas. The bloodbath was compounded by the immediate fallout from the festival’s much-publicised dispute with the content streaming monolith Netflix, the distributor behind several big-name attractions that had been expected to premiere on the Croisette, including Alfonso Cuarón’s Roma, Paul Greengrass’s Norway and the eagerly awaited completion of Orson Welles’s The Other Side of the Wind, which had been decades in the making. Netflix famously opts to release its films immediately online. French exhibitors, resistant to this new model, require a window of cinema exclusivity. Failure to broker a compromise between the two resulted in Netflix withdrawing its films altogether. Bar an unlikely softening in stance on either side, last year’s Netflix-backed competition entries Okja and The Meyerowitz Stories will remain anomalies for the foreseeable future. In place of the predicted big shots are several names that have casual observers scratching their heads: Eva Husson (Girls of the Sun), Ryusuke Hamaguchi (Asako I &amp; II), Kirill Serebrennikov (Leto), Sergei Dvortsevoy (My Little One), Nadine Labaki (Capernaum) and Abu Bakr Shawky (Yomeddine). Apart from the Egyptian newcomer Shawky – granted a competition slot for his debut feature, an irregular occurrence at Cannes – these directors are not unknown quantities to critics and industry folk schooled in the contemporary festival circuit. But they are the sort of up-and-comers, mostly hailed for previous, promising but modestly exposed works, that Cannes tends to reserve for its secondary Un Certain Regard section: a lively strand dominated by rising stars, mixed in with the occasional competition regular serving some sort of demotion sentence. This year’s relegated major is Ukraine’s Sergei Loznitsa, whose impressive but grindingly difficult A Gentle Creature was in competition last year, and proved sufficiently alienating to earn his latest, Donbass, an opportunity as this year’s Un Certain Regard opener. While the odd talented upstart is occasionally fast-tracked to competition status – Andrea Arnold made the grade with her 2006 debut Red Road, and has competed twice since – the festival tends to take a cautious, conservative approach to programming its top tier. An old boys’ club (with emphasis, regrettably, on “boys”) predominates: veterans like Michael Haneke, Ken Loach, Pedro Almodóvar and the Dardenne brothers make the cut for almost every film they make, major or minor, competing principally against others who have been to the rodeo before. This year’s competition lineup isn’t a complete rejection of the old guard, with contenders including the former Palme d’Or winner Nuri Bilge Ceylan (The Wild Pear Tree), the 87-year-old New Wave luminary Jean-Luc Godard (The Image Book), and revived American firebrand Spike Lee – though referring to Lee, returning on agitated form with the timely racial drama BlacKkKlansman, as any kind of elder statesman suggests the festival is experiencing some form of generational shift. But of the 21 films in the lineup, 10 come from Cannes newcomers – a far higher number than in other years under Frémaux’s rule and an exciting indication that Cannes is ready to refresh its auteur pantheon. Not all the newcomers are, well, newcomers: fresh from his Oscar win for Ida, Pawel Pawlikowski makes his Cannes debut with the similarly-styled Cold War, while Jafar Panahi, an embattled political prisoner in his native Iran, is seeking to complete the European festival triple crown (after winning Berlin’s Golden Bear and Venice’s Golden Lion) with his first competition entry, Three Faces. Hamaguchi is comparatively new on the block, but his last film, the five-hour female friendship saga Happy Hour, was an international festival hit minted at the more left-field Locarno showcase. Such selections are an encouraging sign that Cannes selectors, rather than focusing merely on the festival’s own hierarchy, are wising up and catching on to success stories outside their realm. There are still blind spots here, of course. Only three female directors in a lineup of 21 films remains an embarrassing statistic, one not masked by a female majority on this year’s Cate Blanchett-headed jury. One hopes that Blanchett, never shy about addressing gender imbalance in the industry, gives Frémaux some pointed feedback. And in a festival touted as the pre-eminent showcase of world cinema, it’s always galling when entire continents go awol from the lineup: the flip side of Asian cinema pleasingly having its best Cannes showing in years is the much-protested absence of South America. (Hopes had been high for the Colombian sensation Ciro Guerra to make the grade for his eagerly awaited Embrace of the Serpent follow-up, Birds of Passage; he had to settle instead for opening the independently programmed directors’ fortnight strand.) It’s the unusually low profile of that continent’s northern neighbour in this year’s competition, however, that remains its biggest, most bracing surprise. Lee apart, the only sprinkling of Hollywood stardust comes with David Robert Mitchell’s noir Under the Silver Lake, starring Andrew Garfield. He is the kind of ascending indie director who wouldn’t usually be admitted to the Cannes golden circle so early. Yet there he is, in a slot that former competition bad boy Lars von Trier would dearly love to have. Seven years after earning persona non grata status with his infamous “I understand Hitler” blunder, the Dane has been only half-welcomed back, landing an out-of-competition spot for his serial-killer drama, The House That Jack Built, that smacks of continuing rebuke. Pushed to the fringes in favour of fresher, less offending names, he could well feel piqued enough to say something similarly crass at his comeback press conference. Not everything at this year’s gratifyingly unpredictable festival has to change, after all. Bonjour to the new wave David Robert Mitchell Under the Silver Lake The American director, 44,made his debut in 2010 with The Myth of the American Sleepover, a wistful coming-of-age film that played in Cannes’ low-profile critics’ week section, before sharpening his teeth on the rattling indie horror film, It Follows (2014). Now, with his gonzo 140-minute, Under the Silver Lake, he makes an ambitious play for Lynchian status. Eva Husson Girls of the Sun One of the wildest cards in this lineup, Husson, 41, split the critics with her stylish, sexually explicit teenage dream Bang Gang (A Modern Love Story) in 2015 and now moves on to very different terrain with Girls of the Sun, a study of a Kurdish female battalion reclaiming their its town from extremists. Abu Bakr Shawky Yomeddine Snagging a Cannes competition slot for your directorial debut remains a rare feat, so critics will be curious to find out what the selection committee saw in Shawky, an Egyptian-Austrian film-maker by way of New York University film school, and his comedy, Yomeddine, about two lepers leaving their colony in search of their estranged families. Ryusuke Hamaguchi Asako I &amp; II The Japanese writer-director, 39, has made a number of features since his 2007 debut, but found international acclaim in 2015 with his five-hour intimate epic, Happy Hour, a bittersweet study of female friendship that won awards at Locarno. His follow-up, the romantic drama Asako I &amp; II, runs a mere two hours. Yann Gonzalez Knife + Heart A late addition to the line-up, Gonzalez – a Frenchman and a former member of the dreamy electronica band M83 – made a splashy debut in 2013 with his queer erotic drama, You and the Night, and appears to be bringing similarly neon-hued energy to the competition with his second film, Knife + Heart, a thriller starring Vanessa Paradis.
4||Ditching the satnav: the lost secrets of natural navigationTristan Gooley has got me lost in the middle of London – which, I’ll admit, isn’t a terribly huge achievement. I’m routinely lost in the middle of London. My journeys tend to consist of a hard stare at a map app, 50 paces in the wrong direction and then a kind of abject sustained fumble until I arrive at wherever I’m supposed to be 10 minutes after I’m supposed to be there. And that’s me with Google Maps. Without Google Maps, I’m 80% sure I would have given up and moved into a ditch some years ago. However, this time is different. Gooley, often known as the Natural Navigator, has got me lost on purpose. He’s covered my eyes and led me by the arm through the backstreets of central London, taking time to spin me around every now and again for maximum disorientation. And now, right in the middle of nowhere, he’s asked me to take him to one specific Oxford Street branch of Wasabi. “Remember what I said,” he tells me. I look up. The sun is directly in front of me, throwing all manner of shadows in my direction. It’s lunchtime, so that means I must be facing south. The clouds, too, are lazily drifting from west to east, just as they were last time my eyes were open. I tentatively make my way towards the sun and, miraculously, I find myself on Oxford Street. Then I follow the clouds eastwards and, bingo, I’ve got to where I need to be. Weirder still, it wasn’t even that hard. This is the message of Gooley’s new book Wild Signs and Star Paths. It’s a beautifully written almanac of tricks and tips that we’ve lost along the way, with the intention of helping us regain what he calls the “sixth sense”: our innate ability to scan the landscape and anticipate what might happen next. “There are potentially 11m pieces of information hitting our brain every second,” he tells me as we cross London, “but our brain filters out 99.9% of it.” Simply by being more attuned to this information, Gooley can spot things that have managed to pass the rest of us by. For instance, had I got lost on the way to Wasabi, I could have looked up for the nearest satellite dish. Why? Because satellite dishes overwhelmingly point southeast. Notice this once and you’ll never be able to unsee rows and rows of satellite dishes, all quietly informing you of your place in the world. Gooley’s motto is “Nothing is random.” He’s parsed the world in minuscule detail and located the pattern holding it all together. He’s part Spider-Man and part Neo from The Matrix, albeit much more affable and with a niftier taste in hats. He argues that he’s just managed to hone abilities we all latently possess. “My tuppence-worth is, I think, humanity consistently makes progress and then throws the baby out with the bathwater,” he says. “We had thousands of years of wanting to get from A to B in the most expedient way possible. But now we can get between places incredibly efficiently, and people have realised that they go from A to B to C to D to E to F to G to retirement to death, without actually noticing what they’re doing at those points at all.” If nothing else, his ideology is an antidote to that. It’s reminiscent of mindfulness in that sense; by slowing down and concentrating on every tiny sensation that the present offers you – the feeling of wind on your face, little noises you’d otherwise tune out – you can start to uncover new layers of understanding. However, there is a caveat. “I never made the argument that this way of thinking of the world is expedient,” he says. “There are very few situations where natural navigation is the fastest option.” Walking around London with Tristan Gooley is a copper-bottomed reinforcement of this notion. Every few paces he’ll halt to enthuse about some aspect of the landscape that has somehow passed the modern masses by. In Seven Dials he stops me to point at a tree, marvelling at what he calls “the tick” – the shape caused by its subtle lean southwards. In Soho Square he takes me through a blow-by-blow deconstruction of a holly tree, showing how the lower leaves are spikier than those higher up, and that its north-facing leaves are slightly but significantly larger than those to the south. He simultaneously explains the enormous difference in meaning between one and two pigeons taking off from a lawn at the same time. It’s mind-blowing stuff – granule by granule he’s constructed an intricate jigsaw puzzle of information that perpetually lets him know where he is and what’s going on – but if you need to get somewhere sharpish, it probably isn’t for you. “Navigation was the only thing that held my interest for more than a couple of years,” Gooley explains over tea in a Covent Garden café midway through our jaunt. As he gained more experience, it led him to bigger goals. He’s led expeditions around the world, travelling to far-flung corners to study the methods of the Tuareg, Bedouin and Dayak. He is also the only living person to have both flown solo and sailed single-handed across the Atlantic, a feat that helped remind him of his mortality. “You know you’re at the edge of sensible endeavours when more than half the people you’ve talked to have died,” he says. “I went to seven people for advice on the aviation part and, by the time I took off, three of them were dead in light aircraft crashes.” He pauses. “I think a fourth died subsequently.” But it wasn’t until that escapade was over that Gooley felt the bite of natural navigation. “It was really weird,” he says. “I’d have this major experience of climbing into a boat and sailing through gales and all sorts of challenges, and then a week later I’d be trying to cross a tiny patch of English woodland – maybe only one mile or so – and going: ‘Actually, this is more like how I felt when I was 10.’” Wild Signs and Star Paths is rammed with Gooley’s knowledge. There’s “the tick”, but there’s also “the celebration” (the burst of wildflowers on a forest floor that tells you where light falls) and “the shear” (the tilt of a cloud that indicates wind direction) and “the invisible handrail” (the use of a prominent landscape feature to help you retain your bearings). In one chapter Gooley suggests he can pinpoint the location of a bonfire, even years after it went out, based on foliage alone. The book makes much of the differentiation between what he calls fast and slow thinking – basically between instinct and analysis. The more you painstakingly study the sky for navigational pointers, he says, the more the brain will learn to automate the process. It’s the same difference between sounding out a series of letters on a page and seeing a fully formed word. Eventually Tristan and I reach Regent’s Park, and it’s suddenly as if he’s been plugged into the mainframe. In the middle of an entirely unrelated conversation he stops dead in his tracks and slaps me on the arm. “Did you hear that?” he whispers. I do not hear anything, but say yes anyway. “That’s the cacophony!” he hisses, pointing to a bush full of birds making what I’d assumed were normal bird noises. “Those were alarm calls, between wrens and tits! There’s something in there the birds aren’t happy with.” Gingerly, we make our way over to investigate, but Tristan stops dead again, even more excited than before. He’s seen a squirrel standing on its hind legs. “Look at it go!” he whispers. “We’ve got a cacophony, the birds aren’t happy and the squirrels have picked up. It’s unlikely they would have gone on hyper-alert because of us.” This has now become a mystery that demands resolution, and fortunately one presents itself. A breeze blows through a row of trees, and Gooley has his answer. “Trees picking up, lot of different cloud types, some shear there,” he notes, running through his process aloud for me. “I think this must be a weather warning. There’s the sixth-sense feel. There was something going on that the birds weren’t happy with, and I could sense it without thinking.” Had we been in the jungle, this intuitiveness could have saved our lives. The birds might have spotted a jaguar, for instance, and their cries would have served as our cue to leave before we became dinner. But we weren’t in the jungle. We were in the middle of Regent’s Park, and the birds were just being vague about inclement weather. “Is this sixth-sense stuff even all that applicable here?” I asked myself. On the way home from the station, I’m caught in an unexpected downpour. Fine, the birds had a point and natural navigation has plenty of real-world uses. Long story short, I now trust Tristan Gooley with my life. How to navigate in a city Look for satellite dishes. They all point towards the equator. In London, that is roughly south-southeast. Find an ‘invisible handrail’ and use it to remember your bearings. In the countryside, this might be a river. In a city, it could be a main road. Look at a tree. Do the branches point a certain way? That’s probably south. Are the leaves on those branches smaller than the leaves on the opposite side? That’s definitely south. Use the sun. It rises in the east, sets in the west and moves through the southern sky, giving you a very basic compass. Need to get home? Head against the flow of people at the start of the day or with the flow at the end and you are pretty much guaranteed to find a station. Wild Signs and Star Paths: The Keys to Our Lost Sixth Sense by Tristan Gooley is published on 17 May by Sceptre at £20
5||No laughing matter: how can The Simpsons solve its problem with Apu?Twenty-nine seasons in and 636 episodes since it first aired, The Simpsons last week officially became the longest-running scripted show in American primetime television history. But celebrations have been overshadowed. Once considered to be the high-water mark for biting satire, The Simpsons is the subject of a furore over racist stereotyping that is dividing cast and crew. The row can be summed up in one question: is it time to retire Apu Nahasapeemapetilon? Born in episode eight of the first series, Apu was written simply as “clerk” on the script, with the single line: “35 cents, please.” In his forthcoming book, Springfield Confidential, writer and former leading executive producer Mike Reiss reveals: “Because Hindu convenience store clerks were a movie cliche even back then, I inserted this stage direction under his line: ‘THE CLERK IS NOT INDIAN.’” At the cast reading, actor Hank Azaria, who is white and Jewish, read the part in a bumbling Indian accent anyway, inspired by Peter Sellers in The Party, and got a huge laugh. The character’s fate was sealed: Apu, the goofy, servile, Kwik-E-Mart cliche was born. Standup Hari Kondabolu, 35, from Brooklyn, had homed in on the character in his set for a while before he made the documentary, The Problem With Apu, which has fuelled the debate. For Kondabolu, “a white guy doing an impression of a white guy doing an impression of my father” was the only thing he knew while growing up, when it came to portraying the south Asian experience: “Nothing like us existed apart from this cartoon character,” he says in the film. “Twenty-eight years later, the words ‘Thank you, come again’ still follow me.” The phrase has reportedly been used by Apu only eight times in 31 years, but its mocking sing-song is recognised everywhere. Kondabolu is not alone. In his documentary, actors and comedians including Kal Penn, Aziz Ansari, Aparna Nancherla and Hasan Minhaj line up to discuss the ways in which Apu being the most famous Indian in America warped their high-school experience and their subsequent careers. The Big Sick’s Kumail Nanjiani, a Pakistani actor, has repeatedly complained about still being called to castings requiring “the Apu accent”. In an interview with the Guardian in 2014, Priyanka Chopra, one of India’s biggest showbiz names and now the star of hit ABC show Quantico, said she was sick of how she was so often perceived in the US. “We don’t all talk like Apu!” she emphasised, frustrated. Last week, on the US chatshow The View, she said: “Apu was the bane of my life growing up.” Viewing figures and critical acclaim for The Simpsons have long been in decline, but its cultural significance has not been so heavily weighed since its 1990s peak, when President George Bush was urging Americans to be “a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons”. Matt Groening, who created The Simpsons, seems nonplussed. “I’m proud of what we do on the show,” he told USA Today, in response to mounting criticism of the character. “We live in a time in our culture where people love to pretend to be offended.” Executive producer Al Jean doubled down with episode 633, in which Lisa Simpson appeared to voice the angst from the writers’ room: “Something that started decades ago and was applauded and inoffensive is now politically incorrect,” she says to Marge. “What can you do?” The shot cuts to a framed photograph of Apu, inscribed: “Don’t have a cow, man!” Reiss writes in defence of the character in his book: “We all work very hard at The Simpsons and Apu is the only person in Springfield who works hard at his job. Kids being taunted in the schoolyard by being called Apu isn’t racism, that’s just saying kids are dicks. Still there have been enough complaints to fill a nasty little documentary, called The Problem With Apu. And it has been a problem for us at The Simpsons. Hank Azaria, who takes the most heat for the character, is reluctant to play Apu any more.” Chatting to TV host Stephen Colbert last week, Azaria made clear he felt that listening to the south Asian experience was overdue and that he would be “happy to step aside or help transition [the character] into something new”. He also distanced himself from episode 633, saying: “I had nothing to do with the writing or the voicing [in that episode]. I think if anyone came away from that segment thinking they need to lighten up … that’s definitely not the message that I want to send.” Nancy Cartwright, the voice of Bart, has echoed her support in the modern fashion: on an Instagram meme criticising The Simpsons’ slack reluctance to engage with the debate, she has simply commented “Love this”. Elsewhere, Harry Shearer, the voice of Mr Burns, Principal Skinner and Ned Flanders, told the Observer: “I must pass up the opportunity to enter this particular Twitter outrage machine patch.” But how do you solve a problem like Apu Nahasapeemapetilon? Adi Shankar, a TV producer boosted last week by Kanye West on Twitter, has proposed a public screenwriting competition for an original script “that takes the character of Apu and in a clever way subverts him, pivots him, intelligently writes him out, or evolves him in a way”. He has pledged to produce the winning script as a self-financed fan project should Fox network and The Simpsons’ writers’ room reject it. The latter is a delicate institution characterised, like most US comedy writing rooms, by Harvard Lampoon alumni taking hours to craft a joke and existing on takeaways. In the show’s early golden period, cartoonist Matt Groening, writer Sam Simon (who left after a falling out in 1994) and producer James L Brooks were credited with bringing the art, smart and heart respectively. Little seems to have changed: writers rarely leave and most have worked on the show for three decades. “It’s not enough to be funny,” Reiss puts it. “You also have to get along with everyone. One irritating or obstinate writer can bring the entire machinery of a show to a halt … The Simpsons writing staff consists of 23 very funny non-assholes.” Dr John Donaldson, who devised and taught D’Oh! The Simpsons Introduce Philosophy at Glasgow University, believes the bigger controversy is that the show no longer pushes comedy boundaries. “The Simpsons has aged with its creators. If people aren’t enjoying Apu any more, they need to make him funnier and speak more to the spirit of the age.” Donaldson does not believe the character is “morally harmful or that the creators are responsible for moral harm he may have caused”. It is possible, he says, “to recognise the ethnic stereotyping of Apu without endorsing those stereotypes”. Plus, as the creators are often at pains to emphasise, The Simpsons takes an indiscriminate approach in its targets: everyone is fair game. “That’s a standard response when someone is called out for misrepresenting people,” says Dr Pawan Dhingra, chair of sociology and American studies at Tufts University, Massachusetts, where Azaria gave a speech to graduates in 2016 (some of it in Apu’s voice). “The response is always, ‘We make fun of everyone equally and you shouldn’t be offended.’ That response is flawed because it assumes everyone has equal representation in the media.” That Apu has barely been prominent recently, he feels, is irrelevant. “The damage is done. More broadly, it is felt that you [as an Indian] can never have equal presence in American public or popular culture and, growing up, this caricature is so well accepted and applauded, you think, ‘Well, is this all we deserve?’” As for Reiss, he remains sceptical about what he calls the “hoopla” but admits Apu’s future is uncertain: “It’s not my call: as a white Jewish guy, I can’t tell Indians not to be offended by another white Jewish guy playing an Indian.”
6||As the interest-only mortgage crisis hits, here’s how you can avoid the heartacheLen and Val Fitzgerald won’t be the last people to find themselves staring down the possibility of losing their home. The couple, from Eastbourne in East Sussex, found themselves in the spotlight last week in a case which highlights the crisis involving Britain’s interest-only mortgages after it emerged Santander had launched repossession proceedings against them, even though they never missed a mortgage repayment. They are far from alone. There are about 1.67m interest-only mortgages outstanding in the UK. But while the Fitzgeralds face the prospect of being thrown “out into the street” according to their MP Stephen Lloyd, there are things that others can do to stave off this threat. The wider problem There have been numerous warnings about interest-only mortgages in recent years. Just weeks ago, the main UK regulator the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) said it was “very concerned that a significant number of interest-only customers may not be able to repay the capital at the end of the mortgage and be at risk of losing their homes”. With this type of mortgage, the borrower agrees to pay off the interest each month but makes no capital repayments. Borrowers are expected to make sure they have an investment plan in place – usually an endowment policy – to pay off the debt at the end of the term. Some people face a shortfall because their investment has underperformed, while others never set anything up. In 2013 the FCA revealed that about 1.3 million homeowners faced an average shortfall of more than £71,000. However, the situation may have improved or worsened since then.This year alone, an estimated 85,000 interest-only mortgages are due to mature, and Lloyd said: “I am sure there are tens of thousands of other families potentially facing the same desperate situation [as the couple] in the coming years, which is unacceptable.” So what are the options? When someone with a maturing interest-only mortgage is unable to repay the capital but doesn’t want to sell their home, their lender will sometimes agree to extend the term of the mortgage while switching the loan to a repayment basis. But for many people, the maths on this won’t work because, as they will be paying back capital each month as well as interest, their repayments will be a lot higher. The FCA gives the example of someone whose 25-year, £125,000 interest-only mortgage is about to mature. They have been paying £313 a month, but even if their lender allows the term to be extended by 10 years and switched to repayment, they may find they can’t afford the new monthly payment, which in this example would be £1,208, assuming a 3% interest rate. Also, as is the case with the Fitzgeralds, the borrower’s age may be a big factor. One in nine of all interest-only mortgage-holders are 65-plus. Some lenders have a maximum age at the end of the term – for example, NatWest’s is 70. David Hollingworth at mortgage broker London &amp; Country says that if a homeowner is coming up against their lender’s age limit, this may shorten the mortgage term to such a degree that it means the payments would be unaffordable. However, he adds that some lenders have upped their maximum age, while others will consider lending into retirement. For example, in July 2016, Nationwide increased its maximum age for mortgage maturity from 75 to 85. But there are limits on its largesse: only retirement income can be used when calculating affordability, the maximum loan is £150,000, and the loan must be no more than 60% of the value of the borrower’s home. That and other restrictions mean that deals of this type won’t be open to everyone. Could equity release help? For those in a similar situation to the Fitzgeralds, equity release might be a solution. This is a way to get cash out of a property without the need to move home. Typically there are no monthly repayments. Leading providers include Aviva, Legal &amp; General, More 2 Life and Just. The number of people raiding the equity in their home to pay off their interest-only mortgage is thought to have gone up sharply. Specialist firm Key Retirement says it is finding that 21% of people signing up for equity release are using at least some of the cash to clear a home loan. The most common equity release schemes are mortgage-based products secured against your home and repaid when you die or go into long-term care. These are known as “lifetime mortgages”. Dean Mirfin at Key Retirement says: “Typically, the most a homeowner can raise via equity release is 55% of the value of their property, but this would naturally depend on factors such as the type of property, their age and health.” Some people with maturing interest-only mortgages won’t be eligible because their loan-to-value – the size of the mortgage in relation to its worth – will be too high. This is likely to be the case with the Fitzgeralds, whose Santander mortgage appears to be around 70% of their property’s value. Other options The good news is that there are a growing number of specialist products aimed at older people, including those coming to the end of an interest-only mortgage deal. There is the 55+ Mortgage from retirement specialist Hodge Lifetime, which, as the name suggests, is exclusively for over-55s, and is a standard mortgage where you pay the interest on the loan each month and retain 100% ownership of your property. Notably, the maximum term is up to the youngest borrower’s 95th birthday. The maximum loan-to-value on this deal is 60%. Similarly, Shawbrook Bank has the 55 Plus Interest-Only Mortgage. With this, the main income earner must be aged between 55-75 at the outset and have a minimum income of £16,500 a year, and must not be older than 85 at the end of the term, and there are minimum property value and minimum equity requirements. Family building society has a deal called Retirement Lifestyle Booster, a 10-year interest-only mortgage repaid with a lump sum at the end. With this, you can borrow up to 25% of the value of your property and use it, for example, to repay your existing mortgage. The youngest borrower must be at least 60 at the time of the application. ‘It’s a hell of a situation to be in’ The Fitzgeralds are in a bad position after remortgaging on to an eight-year interest-only mortgage in late 2007. Santander said the parties had originally agreed that when the loan ended the couple would sell the property to pay back the capital - but shortly before that date they decided they wanted to extend the term. Santander says that once a customer reaches 75 it is unable to lend beyond that point. Len Fitzgerald, 77, told his local paper he and his wife had called on Santander to extend the mortgage until they were 85, adding: “We hardly sleep. It’s a hell of a situation to be in.” The couple are said to owe around £180,000 (their remortgage was for £178,500) on a property estimated to be worth between £250,000 and worth up to £260,000. So if they sold the house, that would leave them with only £80,000, which would not be enough to buy another home in the area. It would arguably give them a decent pot of cash that they could use to rent a property. It’s not clear yet what will happen to the couple: a court date was set for the end of April, but Santander said it had agreed to a six-month breathing space to allow discussions to continue.
7||Fish and chip shops battered by soaring costs and freak weatherAnyone wanting to understand the economic problems facing Britain in the early 21st century need only consider its national dish. Chippies are confronting a long list of issues that threaten to send the price of their product rocketing as the holiday season approaches. Brexit, the popularity of online delivery services, freakish weather and concerns about the pollution caused by plastic are all putting pressure on the nation’s 10,500 fish and chip shops. “I’ve had to hold price increases back so I’m taking quite a hit on things because rival shops are undercutting,” said Andrew Crook, president of the National Federation of Fish Friers. At the moment, a cod and chips at Crook’s chippy in Lancashire costs £5.90, but he intends to put his prices up in the summer. “I think summer’s a good time to put prices up. People go on holiday, buy fish and chips and see that some areas are more expensive than back home so that does help.” The drop in the value of the pound since the Brexit referendum means that over the past 12 months it has become 15% to 20% more expensive to import frozen white fish. Higher demand in China, the US and the Middle East for white fish together with cuts in fishing quotas in the North Sea are also contributing factors. Six months ago a kilo of haddock or cod frozen at sea cost around £4 and £5.20 respectively. Today haddock costs about £5.60 a kilo and cod almost £5.80. There is little respite closer to home. Costs of cooking oil, rent and rates and labour are rising. Now there is a growing fear that potato prices could soon go the same way. The wet start to the year has delayed the potato planting season. According to Rob Clayton, strategy director for potatoes at the Agriculture &amp; Horticulture Development Board, farmers are between two and four weeks behind where they should be. This could bode ill for the future if the summer turns out to be a damp squib like the spring. “The holy grail for potato growers is to get the maximum possible leaf cover by the longest day of the year,” Clayton said. “If we were to get a couple of months of warm and sunny weather the problem would go away. If what we end up with is something that’s dull and cool over the next few months then that would retard the development. That is the scenario when you would start to worry about the volume of the crop.” The good news is that there are considerable supplies of potatoes in storage – but these cannot last for ever. “Once you get into August, September that is where those stocks will have run out and the new crop won’t necessarily be as speedy as we thought it was going to be,” Clayton said. “If you’re going to Blackpool in August that’s when you might be expecting a bit of a pinch around chip shop prices.” Another issue is packaging. Crook said there was pressure on the industry to do away with its polystyrene cartons, which cost around 2p each, and introduce compostable alternatives, made in China, that cost five times as much. “We don’t think it’s a solution,” Crook said. “It’s been dictated by Blue Planet and the government’s reaction to it. As an industry we try to do the right thing but people don’t know what the right thing is.” In the 1920s, there were about 35,000 fish and chip shops in Britain. But the number has fallen by two thirds as a huge variety of new cuisines has arrived on the high street. “We’ve been worried for the last 30 years because we’ve had McDonald’s come in and lots of ethnic cuisines and I think people have been scared to put up their prices,” Crook said. Now the popularity of online delivery services like Deliveroo and Just Eat poses another conundrum. “It’s naive to think deliveries aren’t the way to go,” Crook conceded. “But I don’t think the perfect packaging is there for it right now. With fish and chips you’ve got to keep it crisp. You can’t do five deliveries and come back to base. You’ve got to do each one individually and the margins are not there for that.”
8||Liverpool’s Mohamed Salah, an Egyptian hero for the 21st centuryThe village where Mohamed Salah grew up is a cluster of red-brick houses threaded together by dusty unpaved streets and surrounded by a shimmering sea of green fields. In its centre, Ahmed al-Masery sits in an empty coffee shop watching highlights on a tiny, wall-hung TV of his old friend playing for Liverpool against Roma. “I used to play football games on PlayStation with him back in the day,” says the 35-year-old, gesturing at the screen. Back then, Salah would pick Liverpool to play video games with his friend. Now the player is the Merseyside club’s favourite adopted son, a striker whose goals have inspired his team into the Champions League final later this month. Fans are devoted to their “Egyptian king” – one song includes the line “if he scores another few, I’ll be Muslim too”. For the people of Nagrig, a small farming community two buses and a train-ride north of Cairo, Salah’s rise is scarcely believable. The 25-year-old comes back to the village about once a year, al-Masery says, but he’s been totally unspoilt by fame. “He doesn’t even drive when he comes here,” he says. “He walks around the streets like everyone else, speaking to anyone who wants to talk to him.” In Britain, Salah is an emerging phenomenon. In Egypt, his progress has been watched and charted for years. It’s difficult to overemphasise his popularity – his face is everywhere. Every coffee shop has a Salah poster. Murals featuring him alongside other icons of Egyptian culture, such as singer Umm Kulthum and novelist Naguib Mahfouz, have appeared around the capital. He beams out from billboards, selling everything from chocolate bars to soft drinks, mobile-phone tariffs and bank accounts. Such is the power of the Mo Salah brand, that when he lent his name to a government-sponsored anti-drugs campaign, they reported a 400% increase in calls to their hotline. Much has been made in the Egyptian press of Salah’s charity work. It’s been widely reported that he regularly helps newlyweds furnish their new homes with everything they need for marriage, although the recipients of these gifts have never come out publicly. Newspaper columnists and talk-show hosts delight in sharing examples like these of Salah’s good nature, but al-Masery is one of many Nagrig residents who are sceptical. “Most of these stories are just hearsay,” he says. One particularly popular Salah story came after LE 30,000 (£1,250) was stolen from Salah’s father. The thief was caught and in act of forgiveness, Salah’s family did not press charges. Retellings of the story in the press, however, have Salah intervening personally to help the man find work. One version even has Salah giving the man a wad of cash. “The media just wants to talk about Salah, Salah, Salah,” al-Masery says. “He’s a nice guy, and very respectful, but not everything written about him is true.” Not everybody shares al-Masery’s scepticism about the Salah story. In Cairo, where 200 punters crammed onto the pavement at an outdoor coffee shop to watch Liverpool secure their place in the Champion’s League final, 29-year-old football fan Omar Salem says he “doesn’t care” if certain details about the striker are false. “People want to believe these things about him,” he says. “At this point he’s so loved that nobody would ever deny them.” Before last July, you’d be hard pressed to find anyone here supporting the Merseyside club. That’s all changed this season, though, with football fans regularly turning out in force, for every Liverpool game. “It would just be amazing to have an Egyptian player win the Champion’s League,” Salem says. Salem says it was Egypt’s match against Congo in October that marked the beginning of his status as a national icon. Salah’s penalty, four minutes into injury time, put Egypt ahead at the 11th hour, securing the team a place in its first World Cup in 28 years. “When he celebrated that goal,” says Salem, “that’s the image people will remember from that match.” Salem calls Salah the first big Egyptian player “that people can actually relate to”. “We don’t even know what car he drives,” says Salem. Instead, Salah’s story is that of a humble teenager, who through sheer grit and determination earned the chance to represent his country in the big leagues of Europe. For the kids of Nagrig, at least, the legend of Mohamed Salah is very real. His former school was renamed in his honour, and to talk to pupils here, you’d think his story was part of the curriculum. One such pupil, 13-year-old Osama Eid, tells the story of Salah’s rise to fame as if reciting his 12-times-tables. “He’s very respectful and kind,” he says, “and well-mannered and does a lot of work to help the poor.” According to Eid’s friends, he’s the best footballer of their gang. When asked if he’d like to be like Salah one day, he doesn’t skip a beat: “Inshallah.”
9||Nature lovers warm to Kew Gardens' green cathedralIt would have been very difficult to find a more glorious corner of England than Kew Gardens on Saturday. Under a perfect blue sky that banished all memories of the sodden start to the year, pilgrims were paying homage at the botanists’ equivalent of Valhalla. They had returned to their gleaming cathedral to perform a very secular form of worship. After five years of renovations the Temperate House, home to more than 10,000 plants from the world’s “Goldilocks zones” where temperatures are not too hot or too cold, was open again. The £41m project to return the 1863 triumph of Victorian engineering – the size of three jumbo jets – to its original design, but using modern materials, had already garnered lavish praise from the architecture critics at a private opening last week. But, given that it has absorbed nearly £15m of lottery money, the more important question was what would the public make of Decimus Burton’s metal-and-glass paean to biodiversity after its comprehensive overhaul? The answer is politically important. For Kew wants the Temperate House to convey an urgent message: that plants are the foundation of all life on Earth, and they are in trouble. Its cathedral needs to wow if that message is to reach beyond the converted. As the temperature outside what Kew is now billing as “the greatest glasshouse in the world” rose into the mid-20s Centigrade, the pilgrims were emphatic in their response. Christine Bacani, 28, from Canada, saw the house as a refuge from modernity. “It’s so different from social media. You are right here. It’s green in Canada, too. But it’s a different kind. Standing here to be able to see the life around us, it’s cool.” Steve Ketley, 65, was a little emotional as he examined a Chilean wine palm. Ketley worked at Kew for 40 years until he retired in January and helped grow many of the plants now on display in the house from seed. “I have a soft spot for the Temperate House because the plants are more familiar to the hardy gardener,” he said. “People will recognise many of the plants here, unlike, say, tropical plants.” Ketley was particularly taken with the thought that had gone into the planting, ensuring that all the species on display had room to grow for a century or more. “Plants are ruthless,” he said. “Anything vigorous will swamp its neighbours.” Emma Ford and her husband, Grzegorz, from Barnes in south-west London, were taking their daughters Lili, three, and Amee, nine, to see the house. The couple met when Grzegorz came to fix her kitchen. “Today I was telling him to look at the garden and the lighting more closely. It’s time he fixed my garden,” she laughed. “The light and the sun are so special to us in London. To be able to be in a house which captures it enough for life is beautiful.” Many visitors were flocking to take selfies with the star of the show, the Encephalartos woodii, a type of cycad that looks a bit like a palm, described as the loneliest plant in the world. Only male specimens – cloned from one found in the wild in 1895 – now exist, making the hunt to find a female one of botany’s great quests. Boran Djokic, 51, originally from Serbia, was visiting with his daughter Mia, 13, and his mother, Sasha. “For us, the gardens are like relief and now this reopened glass house will be another addition,” he said. “I have been in London for 25 years and today when I walked in I saw it in a different way. I have always seen it underneath big canopies and lush green vegetation. Today they all look small, and this is how it must have been years ago when it was first opened. It was like walking into a whole new perspective.” Helen Smith, 37, came with her partner, Chris. As the sun streamed through the house’s 15,000 panes of glass, Chris made shadow puppets with his hands and produced a bewildering array of tiny kaleidoscopes from a bracelet on his wrist. Viewed through them, the Temperate House was reduced to endless patterns in which people, plants and the building were all magically fused together. For Helen, the trinity of house, plants and people offered a connection to something half lost. “I was four when my parents took me here first. It’s all coming back now. They are no more. So this visit is special.”
10||Donald Trump and Theresa May 'looking forward to UK visit'Donald Trump and Theresa May have held talks by telephone on a range of international issues, the White House has said. A White House statement said that both leaders “reiterated they are looking forward to the president’s visit to the United Kingdom in July”. They also discussed Iran, where the UK is seeking to persuade Trump not to abandon the nuclear deal, and the situation in North Korea. The statement added: “President Donald J Trump spoke today with Prime Minister Theresa May of the United Kingdom. The two leaders discussed the promotion of fair and reciprocal trade, particularly with regard to China. “As planning continues for his upcoming meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, President Trump emphasised his goal of a denuclearised North Korea. He also underscored his commitment to ensure that Iran never acquires a nuclear weapon. Both leaders reiterated they are looking forward to the president’s visit to the United Kingdom in July.” It is understood that the discussion between the two leaders took place before the president made his remarks to the NRA about knife crime, comparing a London hospital to a “warzone”.
11||Azed crossword 2,395Click here for a printable version. The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. It gives one answer as an abbreviation. Prize rules: Send correct solution (one only) and clue to replace definition asterisked (on separate sheet also bearing name and address, securely attached) to Azed No. 2,395, PO Box 518, Oxford, OX2 6WX. Entries should be postmarked no later than Saturday. Please add a brief explanation of your clue (one entry only). £35, £30, £25 prizes and Azed bookplates for the three clues judged best. The Azed slip, containing details of successful competition entries and Azed’s comments, is available on subscription at £16 a year. Cheques payable to the Azed Slip, should be sent to The Azed Slip, Coombe Farm, Awbridge, Romsey SO51 0HN.
4||Observer killer sudokuClick here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
11||Everyman crossword No 3,734
11||Speedy crossword No 1,179
4||Observer sudokuClick here to access the print version Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
0||Tony Bellew stops David Haye in fifth round for emotional triumph in rematchThere will be no more false dawns, no more bragging or bruises, no victory speeches either, for David Haye. Knocked down and out of boxing in five rounds by Tony Bellew, the former world champion at cruiser and heavyweight can leave now at 37 knowing, on balance, he has taken as much from the fight game as he has given. “Take nothing away from David Haye,” the winner said in the ring. “He just got into a slug-fest tonight. The speed and timing go with age. I’ve done it, that’s all. Style makes fights, I’ve always said it.” As he had conceded in their first fight, Haye said: “He was the better boxer tonight, a great champion.” Bellew did not signal the definitive end to Haye’s career, but there is diminishing hunger to watch someone who was once one of the biggest and most exciting hitters in the division. The whistles and boos that greeted his entrance for this rematch were replaced by predictable if subdued rumbles of sympathy and maybe appreciation of his bravery at the end. Down three times in all, he probably would have carried on had there been no referee – or paying customers. The fighters’ antipathy was genuine, although it melded into mutual respect afterwards. Bellew was a brutally magnificent finisher, biding his time, taking the odd hard head shot and pouncing like a cat when the openings came as Haye’s legs slowed. Haye admitted in his dressing room beforehand he needed to be “a lot better” than he was here 14 months ago, when his achilles snapped in round six and he did well to reach the 11th, his corner throwing in the towel as he struggled to right himself from a tangle on the ring apron. It is not quite right that a former world champion should be booed by sections of a 20,000 crowd just a few miles from where he was born but Haye feeds off any sort of energy, good or dark, and ignored the crowd in a lively opening. Bellew looked to land his chopping right over Haye’s jab but his opponent was similarly disposed as they shared the second. Haye’s jab, once his spear of choice, was cocked more than delivered in the third and Bellew seized the moment with a cracking right that sent him to the floor, followed by another that had him over again and up on wobbly legs. This time there was no injury to blame – just his own intemperance, as well as the weight of the years that had gone before. The fourth descended into a thrash but Bellew was in total control, stalking and firing bombs. Haye, hurt and disoriented but still there to have the argument, looked as if he could go at any moment, his head a dart-board now. Haye needed to make a statement even to get past halfway but the narrative was out of his hands. Bellew, so emotional outside the ring, had turned into a cold-eyed predator, wary of his wounded foe but ready to strike again. There was a lull in the fifth, then another teeth-rattling left hook to put Haye down in the centre of the ring. As proud as any British fighter of recent years, the Bermondsey man knew the end was near but he did not want it, surely, to be at the intervention of the referee while he was still standing with his back to the ropes. Then again, very few boxers get to choose the manner and time of their leaving. This had to be Haye’s. The Olympic silver-medallist Joe Joyce, who is in Haye’s stable and shares his new Cuban trainer, Ismael Salas, stepped up a few levels in just his fourth professional bout earlier to win the Commonwealth heavyweight title by stopping the seasoned but bewildered Jamaican champion, Lenroy Thomas in two rounds. Joyce, still learning his trade at 32, had the champion down three times and was landing at will. A left hook to the jaw finished the job. He will harder nights than this from now on. Rio bronze medal light-heavy Joshua Buatsi – one of the few pros with a university degree - racked up his sixth paid win, stopping the Frenchman Stephane Cuevas in the fifth of six. There was woe for the fancied Martin J Ward, who was beaten and stopped for the first time in his 22-bout career, when he found the heavy hands of the Belfast super-feather James Tennyson too much to cope with in the fifth round of their Commonwealth, European and WBA International title fight. He had Tennyson on the floor in the second but was drawn into a brawl and sank to the ropes twice at the end, dazed and hurt. Paul Butler, who lost a challenge for the world super-fly title three years ago, overshot the bantamweight limit by more than 3lbs on Friday, and had nothing to fight for but a pay cheque and pride. The latter was dented in the first round when the unbeaten Puerto Rican, Emmanuel Rodríguez, felled him with a wicked left. Butler, 29, regrouped and had his moments but not enough to dominate a round and the visitor was a convincing winner of the vacant IBF title, by two cards of 120-106 and one of 118-108.
5||From The Americans to The Handmaid's Tale: what's streaming in Australia in MayNetflix Lost City of Z (US, 2017) by James Grey – film, out 29 May One of the loveliest big-budget films of last year: a grand and tragic tale, shot with romance and longing, of a 20th century British explorer’s many attempts to find an Amazonian megacity, a hidden and complex civilisation, deep in South America. Percy Fawcett (Charlie Hunnam) is scoffed at by his contemporaries: how could an Indigenous society ever produce an advanced society shielded from the West? Undeterred and obsessed, Fawcett risks all – his wife (Sienna Miller), his children, and his reputation. Director James Grey’s previous films have been emotionally restrained art house dramas, but the dynamism of the action-adventure genre allows him to reach for the sublime. In his hands, you feel you are really swatting away emerald green branches in the jungle, gliding down the river toward someplace ancient and hidden, and maybe out of reach. Psychokinesis (South Korea, 2018) by Yeon Sang-ho – film, out now From the director of the unusually profound and radical zombie apocalypse film Train to Busan (reviewed in this column last year), comes another genre experiment uniting supernatural themes with corporate conspiracy, spiritual epiphany, and familial love. Writer-director Yeon Sang-ho riffs on the idea of the everyday superhero: a bad father, Suk-Hun, gets a shot at redemption with his estranged daughter, Roo-Mi, after drinking mystically polluted spring water. Through his new telekinetic powers, the film threads together the idea of an everyday champion battling capitalist malice (a little like last year’s Okja, also from a South Korean director). It’s an imperfect, slowly plotted genre film – but also weird and heartfelt and goofy enough to warrant a look. Honourable mentions: The Bourne Identity (film, out now), Dear White People Volume 2 (series, 4 May), The Simpsons Movie (film, 5 May), Mulholland Drive (film, 11 May), Terrace House: Opening New Doors: Part 2 (series, 22 May), Jason Bourne (film, 23 May) Stan Frances Ha (US, 2012) by Noah Baumbach – film, out now “I’m so embarrassed, I’m not a real person yet!” These words are the anti-manifesto at the centre of Noah Baumbach and Greta Gerwig’s wonderful distillation of growing up, tripping over, and living imperfectly. Here, actor Gerwig shrugs off the mantle of muse (long before her brilliant directorial debut Lady Bird), fully asserting herself as a collaborator in a comedic drama that, for all its whimsy, never feels slight, as it flutters around the life of its heroine Frances, a dancer trying to make something – anything – of herself in New York City. The Bling Ring (US, 2013) by Sofia Coppola – film, out now “The suspects wore Louboutins”: in Sofia Coppola’s hands, a Vanity Fair article on the vanity of a gang of rich kids in Los Angeles – who stole $3m worth of consumer goods from the homes of the ultra-rich stars, such as Paris Hilton and Lindsay Lohan – becomes an ironic portrait of teen celeb worship and girlish entrapment. Coppola’s films have always been tuned to the female psyche within various social prisons, but here the material is explicitly satirical. A teen movie turned true-crime tale, The Bling Ring isn’t just a takedown of privileged girls in the Hollywood Hills, but an acerbic indictment of a society that values youth, beauty, wealth and fame as its highest accomplishments. Honourable mentions: Tangerine (film, out now), Adventure Time (series, new episodes from 4 May), Blue is the Warmest Colour (film, 9 May). Foxtel Now Barry (US, 2018) by Bill Hader and Alec Berg – series, new episodes on Mondays If most comedies hinge on what critic Manohla Dargis calls “the clueless, often beleaguered yet fundamentally decent and finally (of course) triumphant character”, Barry uncomfortably, bravely, removes the certainty of triumph. It’s the latest in a spate of anti-aspirational comedies of people who are lost in the system, in the vein of Search Party and Atlanta. Writer, director and producer Bill Hader plays a low-level, disillusioned hitman, who decides to try his luck at acting, bringing him into the orbit of all manner of LA scammers (such as his acting coach Henry Winkler) and deluded hopefuls. Success in the entertainment biz is a goal he’s never likely to achieve, which makes the possible trajectory of this already dark program even darker. What’s more, Barry’s trauma is founded in his past as a marine in Afghanistan, grounding the show’s gags in a merciless view of the US as a country of wandering souls. Barry might be shadowy but it’s never grim, and it is unexpectedly insightful. The Americans season six (US, 2018) by Joe Weisberg – series, new episodes on Wednesdays The dramatic vortex of former CIA officer Joe Weisberg’s spy drama has never really been Cold War politics. No, The Americans’ wonderfully gloomy Reaganite setting, and the premise of deep-cover KGB agents in arranged marriages in suburban Washington, has always functioned as a grand metaphor for the mysteries of long-term relationships. This final season’s plotlines cleave closer than ever to the most jagged, obsessive edges of the relationship between Soviet spies Elizabeth and Philip Jennings. Having resigned from most of his duties at the KGB, Philip is re-recruited to spy on ever-loyal Elizabeth, who is training their daughter as an agent and working on undermining Gorbachev’s Perestroika process. It’s 1987, and they have no inkling of the political chaos that awaits: the dramatic and psychological stakes are higher than ever before. The series has always invested itself in the bonds of family and partnership, yet season six feels gloomier and more doom-laden than its precedents. Picnic at Hanging Rock (Australia, 2018) by – series, all episodes 6 May Pegged by Foxtel as a darker, sexier look at the Australian classic, it remains debatable whether a remake of Picnic At Hanging Rock needs to exist. But the new series is a departure from the norms of Australian television, bringing campy fun to the hypnotic tone of Peter Weir’s original, in which three girls and their teacher are swallowed by the Australian bush on Valentine’s Day in 1900. Based on a viewing of the first episode, the remake is a fresh reimagining in the vein of 21st century, #MeToo feminism. Natalie Dormer (best known for Game of Thrones) plays a governess who brings her own hauntings to the narrative. The show is energetic and aesthetically bold, going way beyond the boilerplate quality of much “prestige” TV. Worth exploring. Honourable mentions: The Talented Mr Ripley, The Breakfast Club, Wolf Children (films, out now), Westworld season two (new episodes on Mondays), The Perfect Storm (film, 8 May). ABC iView Art Bites: Lessons from a Middle-Class Artist (Australia, 2018) – series, out now Anthony from Adelaide, disenchanted by his musical failures, travels to Danvers, Massachusetts, to meet Matt Farley, to learn how to become a middle-class artist. Farley is a spam songwriter – his strategy is to go for bulk, writing and uploading 18,000 comedy songs to streaming services to earn half a penny for each listen. The songs are slight and silly, but it is genuinely heartening to see a little guy make music streaming systems work for him. Farley’s blueprint for doing just that is fascinating. Honourable mentions: The Checkout (new episodes on Tuesdays), Rage (new episodes on Sundays). SBS On Demand The Handmaid’s Tale (US, 2018) by Bruce Miller – series, new episodes on Thursdays The Handmaid’s Tale has never been an easy watch, but the second season of the dystopian drama – set in a future where a religious order of male power has enslaved fertile women – is somehow grislier than the first. By the end of episode one, June (Elisabeth Moss), five weeks pregnant, has reconnected with the Resistance and stolen away to freedom, but not without the show moving toward full horror in its aesthetic conventions. The Handmaid’s Tale is not subtle storytelling: the violence is always at fever-pitch, the dramatic stakes are unmodulated. And that can mean that its other themes – solidarity, resistance against tyranny, the concept of “gender treason” – slide by unnoticed. For many, the anguish of watching won’t be worth it. But the vision of a totalitarian society is realised so fully that the story remains gripping and its message vital. Frog Dreaming (Australia, 1986) by Brian Trenchard-Smith – film, until 20 May This gorgeous film from a lost chapter of local cinema history is back in the SBS catalogue for a brief spell. Last year for this publication, I wrote about Frog Dreaming: “a strange and rather wonderful should-be Australian classic: a children’s adventure film from 1986, which plays like a lost tradition of politically incorrect kids’ cinema. Its boy hero is a 15-year-old American called Cody (played by Henry Thomas, the star of ET) who lives in an idyllic Australian valley town. In Devil’s Knob national park full of ‘frog dreamings, like sacred sites,’ he stumbles on a pond haunted by a monster alluded to in local Indigenous stories. Every frame of this film is suffused with madness and love. A very fine, overlooked piece of fantasy film-making”. Honourable mentions: Lost Highway, The Player, Dead Ringers, Margin Call (films, out now), Eurovision Song Contest 2018: Semi Final 2 (NITV, 13 May), If You Are The One (new episodes on Sundays), Sons of Namatjira (NITV, 14 May), Redfern Now (NITV, 17 May), Guy Fieri (collection, 24 May). • This article was edited on Tuesday 8 May to correct the location of the Art Bites documentary subject
12||'The biggest scandal ever': fraud campaigner hopes for banking justiceIn the 90s Denise Brailey, a single mother who was beginning to make her name as a tenacious consumer rights advocate, enrolled in a criminology course. To her surprise she was told by her professor that there was no white-collar crime in Australia so she would be looking into murders and other assorted wrongdoing. How things change. Over the past two weeks the banking royal commission has exposed the shocking extent of misconduct and possibly criminal behaviour by the financial sector in a system driven by greed. Sign up to receive the top stories every morning The revelations have stunned the nation but not Brailey. She has campaigned on behalf of the victims of misconduct for more than two decades, helping hundreds of people to claim redress in a variety of cases such as the finance brokers scandal, and the collapse of the finance companies Storm Financial and Westpoint. But the current royal commission, which has pointed towards the type of systematic fraud she has been denouncing for years, still represents a kind of crowning glory after years of hard slog for Brailey, who founded and single-handedly runs the Banking and Finance Consumers Support Association from a cottage in the Western Australian bush. “I’ve lobbied for two royal commissions and 23 parliamentary inquiries in my career but this is the biggest scandal I have ever uncovered,” she says of what she calls the “black box” fraud carried out by lenders. “I’m a little weary and a bit worn out. I’m 71 now and I’ve often wondered how long I can keep it up. But it’s something I started doing because people would come to me saying, ‘I’m about to lose my house and all my savings.’ “My parents understood decency and I think that’s where I get this from. I love digging into these kind of problems and and I love using my skills to help everyone else.” Brailey, who has completed three degrees to help in her fight, is nevertheless frustrated that the commission’s terms were drawn so narrowly by a government that tried from the beginning to do whatever it could to limit the impact of the inquiry on the big banks. “I feel vindicated by what’s been revealed at the commission so far, although it’s not what we really want,” Brailey says. “The terms have been written by the banks’ lawyers and steered by Asic. “We need a proper royal commission – this is not a proper royal commission. Kenneth Hayne is doing a good job, he has a high intellect and is very clever. Rowena Orr is also very impressive. But the problem is that he is only as good as the material put in front of him for political purposes.” The current commission is just scratching the surface, she says, and should be extended to examine the “mechanics” of the loan industry that have so enraged Brailey and given her the motivation to keep digging. In a 20-page submission to the royal commission, she details the experiences of borrowers who have come to her for help after being crushed at the hands of the mortgage industry. They are typically people towards the end of their working lives, she says, who have paid off their mortgage but are tempted by sales people into taking out a large interest-only loan to buy an investment property. (The lenders even have an acronym for them: Arip, which stands for asset-rich, income-poor.) These loans require low documentation and are often approved with little proper regard for how much the borrower can afford. In many cases seen by Brailey, the income is actually exaggerated by the lenders – so-called “liar loans”. In addition, borrowers often discover that the size of the loan is much bigger than they thought. “The banks devised a product, the interest-only loan. They wanted people to think it was a normal loan so they called it a low-doc loan because it only needed a low amount of documentation,” Brailey says. “They had to fudge the income to make unaffordable loans look affordable by use of a bank-engineered calculator, which could then be processed by a computer. “The banks were doing all this – the business development managers, the middle managers, the brokers. They were told they wouldn’t make any money if they didn’t do it. When they asked why they had to enter an income of $150,000 when it was $50,000, they were told that lawyers had checked it out and it was all fine. They were told that the inflated incomes on the loan application forms were projected incomes. The borrowers didn’t have the money but they were approved because it meant the brokers and other staff would meet lending targets and earn their percentage as a bonus.” This kind of scenario was brought shockingly to life in the royal commission, such as in the cases of Jacqueline McDowall and her husband. They were guided into selling their home with disastrous consequences, by a Westpac adviser who nevertheless made thousands of dollars in commission. “While all this evidence keeps coming out, you’ll never have trust or confidence in the banks ever again. It’s notable that all the people giving evidence are middle managers. “A proper royal commission would have to look at the mechanics of the loan business and how the chiefs at the top of the banking sector are acting as a cartel. You’ll never clear it up unless you do that.”
13||Sir Alex Ferguson: true to Clydeside and certainly no average pensionerThe news about Sir Alex Ferguson will have come as a shock to anyone who saw him on the pitch at Old Trafford last Sunday, presenting Arsène Wenger with an award in recognition of his 22 years as Arsenal manager. Though 76, the former Manchester United manager looked in good health and high spirits, as he has done throughout his retirement since standing down five years ago. Ferguson retired from football management in 2013 though in practice he has been far busier than the average pensioner, putting his name to books on leadership, frequently visiting the United States where he has been lucratively in demand as a lecturer and motivational speaker, indulging his love of horse racing and, not least, attending United games. Though careful not to overshadow any of the three managers who have succeeded him at Old Trafford, and tactfully reticent on the media front, Ferguson occupies a seat in the stand at most United matches. This time last year Ferguson even made an appearance in the Old Trafford press room, something he had not been doing in the later years of his managerial reign, turning up to present another long-service award, this time to a reporter from the Manchester Evening News. Typically, he swore a little and made a few jokes about the reporter’s footballing allegiances. He did not seem to have changed at all from the Ferguson who grew to a position of immense power and control in 26 successful years at United. Perhaps because of all the success he achieved, Ferguson avoided the usual pitfalls that bedevil football managers in retirement. He was not bitter at being forced out or replaced, because he had made the decision himself. He did not feel he had left too early or had work still undone, because he had lasted longer than anyone imagined possible and produced at least three different title-winning teams – teams that all played with the same character and shared the same work ethic as the man who grew up in the Clydeside shipbuilding community and never failed to remind anyone that that was where he learned his values. He seemed to be both enjoying his version of retirement and doing well out of his leisure time, and not many ex-football managers get to say that. One of his former players, Mark Hughes, was busy earning his relegation-threatened Southampton side a point at Everton when the news broke. “I have only heard a couple of rumours,” the Southampton manager said. “I was hoping it wasn’t true.” Sam Allardyce, the Everton manager and a close personal friend of Ferguson, described the news as tragic. “I am going to try and find out how serious it is as soon as I can,” Allardyce said. “It is obviously a brain haemorrhage or a brain bleed. I hope he is in good hands and I hope he can make a full recovery.”
0||Bellew stops Haye in fifth round: heavyweight boxing – as it happenedDavid Haye speaks: “Tony boxed a great fight, he did some really clever stuff in there. He boxed good, and I didn’t, it’s that simple.” “I thought I was fit enough to beat him, it turns out I wasn’t, but he’s a great champion. Is this the end? It didn’t feel great in there tonight, but I don’t know. I lost to the better man, so congratulations to Tony.” An emotional Tony Bellew speaks: “I lost my brother-in-law in August – his dad’s here tonight, and I swear he was with me too. Ashley, I love you, mate. He’s been on my mind the whole time, I miss him so much. I’m broke, la. I’m just broke.” “David Haye is an amazing fighter, we just got into a slugfest. Age is a factor with his style. He goes down as a better fighter than me. But I won, against all the odds. I was willing to be finished off in this ring tonight, I’m struggling bad but I’ve done it, and that’s all that matters.” Well, well. Tony Bellew is in tears, with David Haye quick to offer his congratulations. It’s not particularly nice to see a once-great fighter go out in the manner Haye surely has, but full credit to Bellew, who was by far the quicker, smarter fighter and was ruthless in getting the job done. Round 5 of 12: After two minutes of cagey shadow boxing, Bellew picks his moment and puts Haye down a third time! It’s a heavy, awkward fall for Haye in the centre of the ring. The referee lets the fight go on, but not for long – Bellew stops Haye in the fifth! Round 4 of 12: It looks like Haye may have damaged his ankle again – he’s off balance, totally unable to repel Bellew’s quickfire combinations. This is a little sad to see from a former world champion, but he’s clinging on and hoping for one last Hayemaker. He digs deep and momentarily halts Bellew’s charge, but he still looks in big trouble. Unofficial scorecard: Haye 37-38 Bellew Round 3 of 12: Haye has nicked the first two rounds, but Bellew looks fresher – can he get one on the board? He keeps Haye moving and working hard, and almost connects with a jab. Haye launches a late offensive, swings and misses, and Bellew’s one-two on the counter puts Haye down against the ropes! He gets up, but another combination sends him down again! He’s saved by the bell... Unofficial scorecard: Haye 27-28 Bellew Round 2 of 12: Haye looks a little cumbersome in the middle of the ring, but lands a sloppy combination and a body shot. Haye then lands a decent right, with Bellew throwing his gloves up, asking if that’s all he’s got. Haye takes the round, but is leaning heavily on his front foot – he won’t want this to go the distance. Guardian unofficial scorecard: Haye 20-18 Bellew Round 1 of 12: There’s a weird Brexit vibe to the two fighters’ trunks, with Haye sporting a Union Jack and Bellew in EU blue with yellow stars. Bellew finds some joy with his jabs but loses balance, while Haye struggles to find any rhythm in a patchy first round, but lands the bigger blows, including a big right at the bell. Guardian unofficial scorecard: Haye 10-9 Bellew After both fighters are given a hearty booing by the crowd, they touch gloves and it’s officially on. We’re moments away. This will be Haye’s 32nd fight – he has a 28-3 record. It’s Bellew’s 33rd – he’s won 29, lost two and drawn one. Let’s get ready to rumble, then. Here comes Tony Bellew, cutting a moodier figure with the hood up on his robe as Haye waits in the ring wearing headphones. They’re certainly going big on the theatrics. David Haye is striding out to this slice of disco magnificence, grinning from ear to ear... Michael Buffer’s in the ring, ‘Sweet Caroline’ is blaring out – it can only mean one thing... ring walks are imminent. Predictions? AJ says Haye is the more talented fighter, but “you can’t deny Bellew’s heart”. Personally, I think Haye is battling his own body as much as his tenacious opponent – but if he can hold himself together, revenge should be his. While you’re here, why not sign up for The Recap, our weekly round-up of our best sporting coverage? Campbell gets the job done against an outmatched opponent, and says he is now lining up a rematch with Yvan Mendy, the only other man to defeat him. Eddie Hearn, never knowingly absent from ringside for these PPV occasions, confirms they’re set to fight a title eliminator, with the winner facing Mikey Garcia. In fine MBM tradition, you’re lining up to have a dig at tonight’s gladiators. “I don’t really mind who wins between Haye and Bellew, but every time I see a clip of Haye doing something he’s got the worst music on,” says David Jerome. “For that reason alone, I hope Bellew wins.” Nathan Fisher comes armed with heavy sarcasm: “I’m just wondering if you can shed any light on the rumours that Bellew has a wife and kids? He’s a pretty coy interviewee and I’d like to know a little more about that aspect of his life.” John ‘The Gorilla’ Ryder has stopped Jamie Cox in the second round, and is now targeting a super-middleweight world title shot. 2012 gold medallist Luke Campbell, who lost his WBA lightweight title bout to the exceptional Jorge Linares last year, is now in action against Troy James. There was a surprise earlier on at the O2 Arena, as Belfast’s James Tennyson inflicted a first ever defeat on Martin Joseph Ward in their super-featherweight bout. Olympic silver medallist Joe Joyce defeated Lenroy Thomas by second-round KO in his fourth professional fight, and Emmanuel Rodríguez became IBF world bantamweight champion after beating Paul Butler on points. Haye has tweeted – or possibly his PR, seeing as his hands have been wrapped. He’s trying his best to look relaxed: Anthony Joshua is ringside as a Sky pundit, and thinks Bellew has a chance of a repeat win tonight. On Bellew’s pre-fight aggro, he says “I do believe mind games are a big part of the build-up. They are listening – you’ve got to keep poking away.” Very few sequels live up to the original. For every Empire Strikes Back, there are several hundred Speed 2: Cruise Controls. Tonight’s sophomore meeting between David Haye and Tony Bellew has the potential to join that select club. After a long, drawn-out build-up packed with bluster and bile, Haye v Bellew I proved to be an absurd if absorbing experience. A promising contest fell apart when Haye snapped his Achilles in the sixth round. Barely able to throw a punch, Haye was at the mercy of his underpowered opponent, who laboured to a late knockout win. It was a case of the stoppable force against the unmoving object. Haye’s career seemed finished on that miserable night but he returns 14 months later cutting a very different figure. There is less swagger in his step this time, only a quiet confidence that a new coach has revived his pugilistic power. It’s been left to the abrasive, outspoken Bellew to supply the necessary pre-fight needle, with Haye swerving the verbal blows. Whether the former world heavyweight champion is waiting patiently until his fists can do the talking, or is still bruised from that first encounter, only time will tell. Bellew has also stayed away from the ring until this rematch, and will be motivated by Haye being made an odds-on favourite. Here’s hoping for all the thrills of the first fight, with none of the farce. Niall will be here shortly. In the meantime, here’s Kevin Mitchell’s big fight preview: The conversation with Tony Bellew was idling towards an emotional conclusion as he reflected on what mattered to him in life: family, home, friends, Everton Football Club. And then the fighter detailed in a chilling blast of invective what he was going to do to David Haye at the O2 Arena in London on Saturday night. “I want to cause havoc,” he said, eyes on fire. “I want to cause mayhem – and I mean the worst mayhem you can see. Something happens to me [in the ring]. I’m gonna flick a switch. I want to do damage. I swear when I get him on Saturday, he’s going to pay for every word. I’m going to smash him. And I’m not going to stop. He’s finished. He has no idea what’s coming.”
14||Trump's knife crime comments are ridiculous, says London surgeonThe suggestion by Donald Trump that guns are part of the solution to knife crime in London is ridiculous, a trauma surgeon in the capital has said. The US president told the National Rifle Association convention in Dallas on Friday that a “once very prestigious hospital” in London was like a “warzone”. He appeared to be referring to reported comments by Martin Griffiths, a lead trauma surgeon at the Royal London hospital in Whitechapel, who likened the spate of stabbing victims coming through the doors to scenes in a military hospital. Prof Karim Brohi, another surgeon at the hospital and the director of London’s major trauma system, said knife violence was a serious issue for London. “We are proud of the excellent trauma care we provide and of our violence reduction programmes,” he said in a statement on Saturday. “The Royal London hospital has cut the number of our young patients returning after further knife attacks from 45% to 1%. “There is more we can all do to combat this violence, but to suggest guns are part of the solution is ridiculous. Gunshot wounds are at least twice as lethal as knife injuries and more difficult to repair. We are proud of our world-leading service and to serve the people of London.” In response to comments on Twitter, Griffiths wrote: In his speech, Trump used a familiar argument to defend gun ownership, asking whether vans, trucks and cars, which have also been used by terrorists, should be banned. Then he turned to knives. “I recently read a story that in London, which has unbelievably tough gun laws, a once very prestigious hospital, right in the middle, is like a warzone for horrible stabbing wounds,” he said. “Yes, that’s right, they don’t have guns, they have knives, and instead there’s blood all over the floors of this hospital. They say it’s as bad as a military warzone hospital.” Trump stabbed the air several times with an imaginary knife and muttered: “Knives, knives, knives. “London hasn’t been used to that. They’re getting used to it. Pretty tough. We’re here today because we recognise a simple fact. The one thing that has always stood between the American people and the elimination of our second amendment rights has been conservatives in Congress willing to fight for those rights. We’re fighting.” The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, who has previously clashed with Trump over terrorist attacks in the capital, declined to respond to the president’s latest remarks. Charlie Falconer, a former justice secretary, said: “Trump makes Londoners dislike him more, and the US dislike London more. Mutual dislike is not good as the UK leaves the EU. Trump gives the impression he couldn’t give a fig.” The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, set Trump’s comments in the context of Conservative cuts to policing resources and the influence that has had on the rise in violent crime. The most recent complete set of official data on crime in the US, the 2016 uniform crime report published by the FBI, showed that there were 5.3 murders and non-negligent manslaughters per 100,000 people, equal to 53 per million. Police-recorded crime in England and Wales for the same period, published by the Office for National Statistics, showed 10 homicides – murder and manslaughter – per million. It was not immediately clear which story Trump had read about London, but it was possibly a Mail Online article published last month, which had the headline: “Surgeon says he is regularly treating children in school uniform for gun and knife wounds in London hospital which is ‘like Afghan war zone’.” The article quoted a BBC Radio 4 interview with Griffiths and said the Royal London had treated a record 702 stabbing victims in 2017. “Griffiths said colleagues who served in the military likened their work at the London hospital to being back at Camp Bastion, the British forces base in war-torn Afghanistan,” Mail Online reported. Trump is due to make a “working visit” to the UK on 13 July, for which mass protests are expected. Khan tweeted last month: “If he comes to London, President Trump will experience an open and diverse city that has always chosen unity over division and hope over fear. He will also no doubt see that Londoners hold their liberal values of freedom of speech very dear.” It emerged late on Saturday that Trump and Theresa May had held talks amid the controversy but there was no indication in a White House statement that the leaders had discussed the issue of knife violence or the president’s remarks about the London hospital.
15||Budget will show how shallow Liberal party's 'debt and deficit disaster' really wasThis budget looks set not only to be replete with spending commitments and tax cuts, but also to be the final nail in the coffin of the Liberal party’s scare mongering about the evils of debt and deficit. A few weeks ago, I suggested that because of unexpected increases in taxation revenue and with an election due in the next 12 months, the budget would see the treasurer “doling out the pork”. Two days later, the leader of the National party rather confirmed this by referring to the treasurer in an interview with the Daily Telegraph as “Scott Santa Claus Morrison”. Morrison quickly tried to dampen these expectations but the cat was well and truly out of the bag, and since then all the pre-budget drops have been about new spending or tax cuts with little sense of the need for restraint. Sign up to receive the latest Australian opinion pieces every weekday This has actually brought with it some problems for the government as they discard what they once told us were sacredly held beliefs. Last year, Morrison for example, was adamant that the NDIS needed to be fully funded, and could only be done so by raising the Medicare levy a half a per cent. He did this, he told the nation, because “it’s time ... we give disabled Australians and their families the guarantee they deserve”. But now? Guarantees? Pfft. That’s so 2017, we have a strong economy, don’t you know! Morrison told the Today Show’s Karl Stefanovic this week that, “I’m pleased as punch for people with disabilities that we can guarantee them those funds from a stronger economy”. You would have to be as dumb as Punch to believe a strong economy is guaranteed. The point of the Medicare levy increase was that the NDIS is not some one-off project. It is ongoing – when the economy is doing well and when it is not. Now Morrison would have us believe the economy will always be doing well. The only reason the government has dumped the Medicare levy increase is because back in 2016 it had imposed a dopey cap on tax revenue of 23.9% of GDP. So great is the influx of revenue coming via improved export prices and employment growth that it looked set to break through this cap in the next few years – and thus they needed to reduce the tax take. But why not just bank that money and reduce the deficit and government debt?After all, that was what Morrison said he would do in last year’s budget. Now, instead, extra revenue will be spent – or foregone as is the case with the rescinding Medicare levy increase. This is what happens when your budget policy is framed more by politics than economics. There is not one iota of evidence that the economy suffers if tax revenue goes above 23.9% of GDP. When tax revenue rises it does so for pretty much one reason only – the economy is doing well. That is why in 2004-05 and 2005-06 at the height of the mining boom, tax revenue was equivalent to 24.3% of GDP. And that is why when you do get an unexpected influx of revenue, blowing it on tax cuts is about the dumbest thing you can do, because while you might be able to afford it while things are unexpectedly doing well, you cannot when things are unexpectedly doing poorly. And no one ever expects the economy to do poorly. In Peter Costello’s last budget in 2007, the Treasury predicted that “the world economy is expected to continue to expand at a strong rate” and that “growth in the United States is expected to ease in 2007, before strengthening in 2008”. Instead it went backwards into the deepest recession since the second world war. Morrison’s position also highlights just how hollow is the Liberal party’s talk on debt and deficit. During the Rudd-Gillard years the cries about rising government debt were unending. And yet government net debt is now higher than it has ever been and five years into government, the Liberal party are yet to deliver a budget deficit smaller than it was in 2012-13. Now that isn’t to say the government should have been reducing the deficit or debt faster than they have – it just highlights how stupid it is to make debt and deficits your key measures. The reality is both are important but are subject to the requirements of the economy. When the economy is weak and tax revenue is low, cutting spending to get back to surplus is a fool’s errand that is only good if you believe the country should experience a recession. Morrison, like Joe Hockey (and Costello) before him, has discovered that the path to a budget surplus is paved with revenue growth, not spending cuts. But now that he has the revenue of which Wayne Swan could have only dreamed, the desire for a surplus, or to reduce debt, has become less important. In the 2014-15 budget, the government planned for a budget surplus of “at least 1% of GDP by 2023‑24”. That was a bit too specific for Morrison, who last year watered-down the commitment to “as soon as possible”. Now that “as soon as possible” is, as Morrison told reporters this week, “conditioned by ensuring taxes do not rise more than 23.9% of the economy.” You could argue given the current low inflation and income growth that the economy is not actually strong enough for a faster return to surplus than previously planned. But Morrison is not making that case. For him the economy is strong – and will ever be so. He is just using the 23.9% line as an excuse for dolling out tax cuts because an election is coming. It’s about politics, not economics. And it reveals just how disingenuous the Liberal party’s decade-long preaching on the evil of debt and deficit has been. And that should never be forgotten. Greg Jericho is a Guardian Australia columnist
13||Jürgen Klopp seeks top-four slot and end to stupid questions at ChelseaLiverpool need to take a point or more from their visit to Stamford Bridge this afternoon in order to secure their place in the top four, leave the rest of the season free to concentrate on the Champions League final and give Jürgen Klopp a break from answering stupid questions. The German has become adept at either widening his eyes or letting his jaw drop in response to some of the inanities that come his way during media duties, though to his credit he usually manages a reasoned answer. “Yes of course it is important to this club to play in the Champions League next season,” he said slowly, as if examining the query for a catch it did not contain. “We are strong enough to compete against the very best teams in Europe so that is what we want to do. We are ready for this challenge.” Clearly it is not only Sybil Fawlty who specialises in the bleedin’ obvious, though Klopp was not being flippant and neither should his reply be dismissed lightly. How many other English clubs could currently say the same? In under three seasons at Anfield Klopp has turned the club into a force in Europe to such an extent that clubs with bigger budgets and more experienced squads – Chelsea and the two Manchester sides, say – ought to be vaguely embarrassed. Since he was last in the Champions League final, with Borussia Dortmund in 2013, no Premier League side has gone as far, and now he is back with a club that managed qualification only twice in the previous eight seasons. Klopp’s Liverpool are strong in a way that few sides from this country have been in Europe since Manchester United were in their pomp. When Chelsea became the last English winners of the Champions League in 2012 they were a fading force, not really hitting the heights they threatened under José Mourinho or (briefly) Guus Hiddink. United went to the 2009 and 2011 finals as clear underdogs and were duly humbled twice by Barcelona. Those versions of Chelsea and United were certainly not sides others were hoping to avoid in the draw, which is what Liverpool have just become. After seeing what they managed against the English champions and the last Italian side in the contest, even a team of Real Madrid’s pedigree and experience will be careful not to make any assumptions. Klopp has turned Mohamed Salah into a Ballon d’Or candidate, made Manchester City think twice about the wisdom of letting James Milner go, reinvigorated his back-line options with Trent Alexander-Arnold, Virgil van Dijk and Andy Robertson and, perhaps most impressively of all, compensated for the loss of Philippe Coutinho by making the team revolve around the outstanding Roberto Firmino. Klopp has bought well, built a side that can hurt just about anyone and he has not yet finished. Naby Keïta arrives from RB Leipzig in the summer – Liverpool might even take him as a guest to the Champions League final in Kiev – and Klopp expects to make one or two more signings before the start of next season. “Naby has the quality to have a big effect on the team immediately he arrives,” the manager said of the Guinea midfielder. “He is not playing the World Cup so he will have a full pre-season with us, which will help him a lot. We will probably sign a couple more players in summer because we need more depth in the squad. “To bring in players who are 200% better than what we have will be difficult but we had a problem when Coutinho left and Adam Lallana and then Emre Can became injured. You can never remove all injury risk and the boys still did brilliantly, but of course we will try to strengthen the squad because that’s how it is.” Klopp is refusing all invitations to get carried away by the achievement of taking Liverpool to an eighth European Cup final – “I am not interested in reaching finals, I am more interested in winning them” – though he will admit that one of the reasons he would prefer to strengthen rather than stand still is because the English league is so tough. “I do think this is the hardest league,” he said. “The intensity is hard, the fixture schedule is hard. In England every team fights for everything every week. “If there is a reason why English teams have not been doing so well in Europe I would say that is the most important one. I have spoken about this before and I am not looking to complain or make excuses but I think we all know that the schedule you give to your teams is not made for being successful in summer.”
13||Neil Warnock: ‘I’m not saying Cardiff would stay up but I’d enjoy every minute’Neil Warnock has been talking about just how much he loves the way that Fulham play, which leads the conversation into comparisons with his own team’s far more direct approach and whether he thinks the Premier League will embrace Cardiff and the 69-year-old Yorkshireman who is on the verge of winning promotion for a record eighth time. “I’ve no idea, really. I’ll probably answer these questions as and when we get there,” Warnock says with a glint in his eye. “I once went for an interview at Norwich. The first question around the board table was: ‘Do you think Norwich fans would like a Neil Warnock team?’ So I looked every one of them in the eye around the table, and said: ‘Yeah, I think they’d love to win games.’” Warnock pauses for a moment before adding: “I knew I hadn’t got the fucking job.” Warnock is not everyone’s cup of tea but good luck with trying to find a Cardiff supporter that says a bad word about him now. To provide a bit of context, Cardiff were second bottom in the Championship when Warnock was appointed 19 months ago, they had won two of their opening 11 matches and it took time for Paul Trollope’s replacement to discover that the problems at the club transcended what was going on out on the pitch. “The place was fragmented all over,” Warnock says. The turnaround has been astonishing. Warnock has galvanised and united a club, not just a team, by winning 42 of his 80 league games in charge, propelling Cardiff from one end of the table to the other. One more victory at home against Reading , in front of what promises to be the biggest league crowd in Wales for the best 40 years, and Cardiff and Warnock, who turns 70 in December, will be back in the Premier League. Warnock looks remarkably relaxed in the circumstances and also fresh-faced compared with some of his contemporaries. “I’m like I am because of our fans,” he says. “I don’t know any [Cardiff] fans that don’t like me. And I tell you now, you look at some of the managers in the Premier League and the Championship, the fans [at their clubs] don’t like them. It’s horrible, that. And I don’t need that, not at my age. If ever fans chanted my name ‘out’, they wouldn’t have to wait long.” Looking back, Warnock shakes his head at how things have changed since he started out in management with Gainsborough Trinity in 1981. “There were no phone-ins when I was first managing. The first one that came in was called Football Heaven at Radio Sheffield and I’ll never forget the first caller that I listened to. He said: ‘Well, Warnock’s got to go, hasn’t he? How can he stay in the job after that?’ And then the host said: ‘So you went to the game this afternoon, did you?’ The guy replied: ‘Well, no, I didn’t. But I listened to it on the radio.’ I thought: ‘Oh my God, a new era beckons’.” Sheffield United are one of four clubs that Warnock has managed in the top flight, with Notts County, Queens Park Rangers and Crystal Palace the others, yet none of those experiences are recalled with any real fondness. Notts County and Sheffield United were relegated after a season, Palace sacked him after four months and he was dismissed by QPR in the January after winning promotion, leading some to question whether Warnock is cut out for management at the highest level. In many ways it feels as though Warnock enjoys trying to get to the Premier League far more than actually being there. “I would have said that in the past,” Warnock says, nodding. “But if Cardiff got to the Premier League it would be a different ball game. We are quite well organised now as a club. I’m not saying we would stay up. But I just think that I would want to go into the Premier League enjoying it – enjoying every minute of it – and I think I could at this club. “If you look at my past in the Premier League, without going into too many details, I don’t think I had much of a chance at any of them, for different reasons. At QPR, they sold the club and it meant I couldn’t sign a player from the day we went up in April until the last week of August. You can’t do that. Sheffield was also disappointing when we got promotion. It was the same at Notts County.” Whatever anyone says about Warnock, he has a knack of going into struggling clubs and turning things around, often without spending much. Man-management is arguably his biggest strength when it comes to working with players – “It’s my only strength,” Warnock says – although at Cardiff there was a job to do outside as well as inside the dressing room. Warnock explains how he set about “sorting the whole club out” by going to speak to all the departments to find out what problems they had. “I know it’s not my business but I made it my business because I wanted to get everybody together and that was the best way of doing it I felt.” On the pitch, Warnock gave some players a fresh start, vastly improved others and made a few astute and experienced signings, in particular Junior Hoilett and Sol Bamba, both of whom were without a club when he took over. Hoilett has started all but two of Cardiff’s league games this season and been directly involved in 20 goals. As for Bamba, the centre-back has excelled after heeding the advice that he needed to become more of a “Neil Warnock player”. Asked to explain that comment, Warnock says: “He thought he was Beckenbauer, strutting around, passing the ball, dribbling – you name it. And that’s why he was looking for work when I came to see him, because no club wanted to take him on board because he was an accident waiting to happen, if you listen to the Leeds fans. Bamba is never going to be a [Virgil] Van Dijk with the ball and neither is [Sean] Morrison. But defensively they can become very good players.” Cardiff feel like a team that is far greater than the sum of its parts, which is testament to the belief, camaraderie and organisation that Warnock has instilled in his players. None of that will change the way that he is perceived by plenty of supporters elsewhere, but winning promotion, not popularity contests, has always been his thing. “Everyone wants to be loved and liked – but you can’t be as a manager,” he says. “As a manager, you know you’re going to take the brickbats from other clubs and their fans. But I do enjoy making my own fans happy. When I came here, the biggest compliment was when I heard fans say: ‘Well, I’ve never liked him. But I’ve always wanted him to manage us.’”
16||Local elections: something for everyone, but politics deadlockedIn last year’s general election everything changed, but no one won. In this year’s local elections everyone won something but nothing changed. The Conservatives, Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Greens all had vote and seat gains to cheer about, as all parties took a share of the electoral windfall from the dramatic collapse in Ukip. The Conservatives went into Thursday night hoping to avoid the traditional anti-incumbent swing endured by most governments in midterm local elections, but instead came away with morale-boosting seat gains across England. Voters seemed more focused on Brexit than bin collection in this year’s local contest, with strong links between Brexit-voting and Conservative performance, just as were seen in last year’s general election. The Conservatives advanced by an average of 13 percentage points in authorities that recorded a 60%-plus vote for Leave in 2016 – and all of the four Tory council gains came in strong Leave areas. The Conservatives also gained most from Ukip’s collapse, with larger advances in areas where Ukip did best in 2014. However, there was a lot of variation in how the purple cookie crumbled. Labour gained relatively more from the Ukip collapse in places where they were stronger prior to Ukip’s surge, resulting in the restoration of the status quo ante, taking Ukip seats in councils such as Basildon. While the collapse of Ukip and the Brexit realignment both benefited the Conservatives, it is the Liberal Democrats who will be happiest with these results overall. The party picked up more than 50 council seats, recovered control of its erstwhile London strongholds of Richmond and Kingston on large swings away from the Conservatives, and rebuilt a significant presence on many other local authorities. The party did best in areas that favoured both the Conservatives and Remain in past elections – epitomised by their dramatic takeover in South Cambridgeshire – but this was not a straightforward “Remainer revolt”. The party also enjoyed major surges in support in Leave-voting traditional Labour strongholds such as Hull and Sunderland. The Lib Dems may have recovered some of their chameleon-like capacity to mobilise local opposition regardless of the overall political climate. Labour will be more disappointed, as despite making over 60 seat gains, taking control of Plymouth and Kirklees and ending nearly 15 years of Conservative dominance in Trafford, the party finished the count in charge of fewer councils than before. Despite significant seat gains in the capital, predictions of big breakthroughs in traditionally Tory inner-London redoubts such as Wandsworth and Westminster proved wide of the mark. Outside the capital there was a small overall swing away from Labour, costing it control of Derby, Redditch and Nuneaton councils. There were signs that both parties have been hurt by scandals that have made headlines lately. The Conservatives did particularly poorly in areas where the last census recorded a large black community, which may hint at a Windrush backlash. They also fell back somewhat in Kensington and Chelsea, although the swing against them after last year’s Grenfell Tower fire was smaller than some anticipated, and the party suffered a net loss of just one seat. Meanwhile, Labour’s performance was noticeably poor in wards with large Jewish populations, which was particularly costly for the party in Barnet, a marginal London borough the party hoped to gain. Labour’s vote fell in the five Barnet wards with the largest Jewish populations, even as the party advanced strongly elsewhere.The recent antisemitism scandal thus looks to have hurt Labour at the polls this year, and to have played a significant role in the party’s failure to gain control of London’s most marginal council. The results also suggest that neither the government nor the opposition has yet found a way to bridge the deep demographic and geographical divisions revealed in the EU referendum and last year’s general election. Labour registered its strongest gains in areas with many migrants and ethnic minorities, in areas with many students and young people and in the big cities – trends which have been evident since Ed Miliband’s tenure as leader. Nearly all Labour’s seat gains came from advances in London. Yet the party already controls most local and Westminster seats in such areas, limiting the capacity for further gains. Labour cannot hope to achieve a majority if it continues to underperform in areas with key marginal constituencies such as Bolton, Derby and Southampton. The Conservatives have solidified their grip on Leave-voting rural and small-town parts of England with large numbers of older white voters with low education levels. Class politics was again turned upside down: the Tory vote share increased by over 10 points in the wards with the highest share of people doing routine manual work, or who left school with no qualifications, but flatlined in places with the most middle-class professionals and fell in the places with the most graduates. The steep age gradient in party support that emerged in last year’s general election was once again in evidence last week – the Conservatives advanced by up to 10 points in areas with the most pensioners, but there was a substantial swing to Labour in areas with the most voters under 35. The Conservatives remain on the wrong side of demographic trends – doing best with shrinking groups and worst with growing ones. They will struggle to achieve a parliamentary majority unless they can find a way to appeal to graduates, younger voters and ethnic minorities. As the final votes were tallied on Friday afternoon the BBC’s projected national share showed a dead heat, with both Conservatives and Labour on 35 points. Both parties improved on the showing in 2014 by recruiting Ukip voters and advancing in their areas of strength, but both trod water outside their strongholds. These local elections have thus entrenched the polarised, evenly divided status quo. Both the Conservatives and Labour now dominate large parts of England, yet neither party can hope to win a general election majority with support from “home territory” alone. Ukip’s collapse has not fundamentally changed the even balance of power between the two, and the Liberal Democrats, though they showed signs of life, remain too weak and marginal to challenge two party dominance. A resolution to Brexit Britain’s political deadlock remains elusive. Dr Robert Ford is a professor of politics at the University of Manchester. He is the co-author, with Matthew Goodwin, of Revolt on the Right: Explaining Public Support for the Radical Right in Britain. He tweets @robfordmancs
10||Parkland victim's father: 'I haven't heard Trump mention the name of my son'The father of a teenager killed in the Parkland high school shooting challenged Donald Trump to return to Florida and “spend five minutes of [his] time in Joaquin’s empty room”. Manuel Oliver, whose 17-year-old son was shot dead at Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school less than three months ago, was speaking near the NRA convention in Dallas. “I’m impressed with the support that the NRA got from our president yesterday,” he said. “I haven’t heard from President Trump the name of my son, not even once.” Trump and Mike Pence, the vice-president, addressed NRA members on Friday, pledging their support for gun rights and asking for help in electing Republicans to Congress. The president said he had been advised that “going to the NRA convention and speaking today, that will be very controversial. It might not be popular.” “You know what I said?” he added. “‘Bye-bye, gotta get on the plane.’” Oliver and his family have founded a nonprofit, Change the Ref, to protest against the influence of gun lobby money in the gun law debate. On Saturday, about a block away from the convention hall, Oliver addressed more than 200 protesters who had gathered to push for stricter gun laws and highlight the toll of gun violence, from school shootings to gun suicides. “I don’t know who advises our president,’” Oliver said. The protest was organized by StudentsMarch.org, a Dallas-based group, and Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, a national gun control group founded after the Sandy Hook elementary school shooting in 2012. With his wife Patricia watching alongside youth activists and gun violence survivors from Texas and across the country, Oliver created a fifth protest mural. He has created similar images in Miami, Los Angeles, New York and Springfield, Massachusetts, near the headquarters of Smith &amp; Wesson, the company that made the weapon used to kill Joaquin. The Dallas mural depicted a student wearing a backpack in the crosshairs of a gun, flanked by Trump, shown as a “circus festival host”, and NRA spokeswoman Dana Loesch, dressed as a clown holding an AR-15 rifle. “We demand a fair game,” Oliver painted across the large canvas, which he festooned with dangling tickets to America’s “carnival of violence” and a chain of red-white-and-blue balloons in the shapes of guns. Using art as a form of protest has proved to be a kind of therapy, Oliver said. The first time he made a mural to honor Joaquin, he said, on the wall of a Miami art gallery, he impulsively hit the wall with a hammer. He then hit it again and again, 17 times in all. Some of his son’s classmates were watching, he said, and he saw how the sound affected them – how it reminded them of gunshots. On Saturday, he told his audience: “Let’s feel how it feels.” Then he slammed a hammer into the mural 17 times, hitting each of the 17 tiny figures he had painted. He hit the boy in the center of the mural twice. Then he put down the hammer and picked up a bunch of flowers, placing a sunflower in each of the gaping holes. Oliver said his most emotional moment had come as he painted the mural earlier, when a song came on: Moon River, which he listened to many times with Joaquin. He paused, suddenly breathing hard. “I wasn’t expecting that,” he said.
16||Labour peers accuse Corbyn of Brexit cowardiceLabour peers launched an attack on the party leadership last night, accusing it of “paralysis” and “cowardice” over Brexit policy, as bitter recriminations over disappointing local election results burst into the open. The row exploded as calls grew for a full post-mortem into why Labour failed to make more decisive progress in key council battlegrounds and lost control in others, despite the Conservatives being mired in crises over immigration, Brexit and the NHS. Although the party performed better in London than at any time since 1971, it was unable to take Tory strongholds in the capital, including Wandsworth, and fell short in several councils where it hoped to make gains, failing to win in Nuneaton, Derby and Basildon. With Jeremy Corbyn increasingly under pressure from Remainers to develop a more distinct and robust pro-EU policy, Labour peers said they were outraged that the party appeared to be trying to block their efforts in the Lords to achieve a soft Brexit that would allow the UK to remain involved in the EU’s internal market, and provide a solution to the Irish border problem. The Observer understands that more than 40 Labour peers are ready to back a cross-party amendment to Brexit legislation that would instruct the government to begin negotiating future UK membership of the European Economic Area (EEA). This would mean that the UK would leave the EU and not be part of the common agricultural policy, common fisheries policy or be subject to the European Court of Justice. It would also be able to strike its own deal on freedom of movement, while being inside the EU internal market. But the peers have reacted furiously after being told that the leadership is instructing peers who take the Labour whip to abstain in the vote on Tuesday, meaning it will not be passed. The peers say the majority of party members back a soft Brexit including single market membership and the measure would stand a good chance of being passed in the Commons if it were voted through the Lords. The businessman and Labour peer Lord Waheed Alli, who has put his name to the amendment, accused the leadership last night of being “paralysed by indecision”. “This is complete cowardice. There is no point in being in politics to abstain, If you stand in the middle of the road someone is going to knock you over.” he said. His fellow Labour peer Lord Cashman said it was essential to look at a solution that would allow membership of the EEA, as it would not only be good for UK business but also solve the Irish border problem which is now threatening to torpedo a Brexit deal. “Why the frontbench will not accept that as a negotiating position I completely fail to understand.” The party and Momentum said the local elections represented progress. Laura Parker, Momentum’s national coordinator, said: “We’re very pleased to see healthy gains in areas where Momentum campaigned hardest. This just shows how important it is to have an engaged, enthusiastic movement – people who will get out into the community and spread Labour’s message. “The untold story of the night is Labour’s advance on last year’s snap election result. If this result were played out at a general election, the Tories would lose 12 parliamentary seats and be unable to form a government.” But Labour MPs said there were urgent questions the party needed to address that explained why Labour had not performed in line with expectations. Angela Smith, MP for Penistone and Stocksbridge and a member of the parliamentary committee that relays backbench views to the leader, said the row over antisemitism had to be addressed. So too did concerns in many local parties about centralisation, and resentment over attempts to purge moderates from positions in the party. “We are increasingly being seen as a party that is ugly and unpleasant. Voters do not like the total control mentality. They don’t like bullying and they don’t appreciate attempts to shut out alternative views and debate.” Yesterday party moderates launched a new campaign to hold a vote over the party’s Brexit position at its autumn conference, in an attempt to shift it towards a soft Brexit. Tony Blair’s former director of communications, Alastair Campbell, said there was a “dreadful complacency about what it takes to win” at the top of the party and called for leadership on Brexit. “Frankly, if we cannot beat this shambles of a Tory party, we don’t deserve to be in the game,” he said. “All my doubts relate to the course now being followed and, because it is such a huge issue that will determine so much of our kids’ futures, the approach being taken to Brexit … We in my generation have to do what we can to stop the madness of Brexit.” Ben Bradshaw, the former Labour cabinet minister, said: “I think we can stop Brexit and we must stop Brexit, but if we don’t do that we must make sure we stay inside the single market and customs union. Theresa May lost her majority for a hard Brexit in the election last year.” After the Tories averted a meltdown of their vote as many former Ukip voters turned to them, pro-Brexit Conservatives were calling yesterday for Theresa May to honour the will of the people and get out of the customs unions or any version of it. Pro-Brexit ministers are already warning that May could end up causing an electoral “disaster” for the party if she keeps insisting that she wants a “customs partnership” with the EU. Some cabinet ministers are said to be among those who fear that the plan, which was rejected by the Brexit cabinet sub-committee last week, would stop Britain making a clean break from the EU by the time of the next election, due in 2022. May is being warned that anything other than a proper exit from the customs union will see the party punished by pro-Brexit voters. Writing on theguardian.com, Barry Rawlings, leader of Barnet Labour group, said the party had failed to win the borough because “so many of our neighbours believe we tolerate antisemitism”. He called on the party to reveal what action it was taking in relation to complaints of antisemitic behaviour, to demonstrate it is taking the issue seriously. “It is agonisingly difficult to describe the feeling of standing as a Labour candidate in a political environment that has turned toxic,” he writes. “Some members didn’t want to put up posters for fear that neighbours might think they didn’t care about antisemitism. A lifelong member broke down in tears on the doorstep because this would be the first election when she didn’t vote. Doors were slammed in our faces and leaflets were taken out of our hands and torn up in front of us. “We have lost trust with our Jewish brothers and sisters, and it will be a long road back to regaining it. But it’s a road we must travel if we want to claim to be a political movement that can represent any and every community in Britain.”
17||Shock figures from top thinktank reveal extent of NHS crisisThe NHS has among the lowest per capita numbers of doctors, nurses and hospital beds in the western world, a new study of international health spending has revealed. The stark findings come from a new King’s Fund analysis of health data from 21 countries, collected by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. They reveal that only Poland has fewer doctors and nurses than the UK, while only Canada, Denmark and Sweden have fewer hospital beds, and that Britain also falls short when it comes to scanners. “If the 21 countries were a football league then the UK would be in the relegation zone in terms of the resources we put into our healthcare system, as measured by staff, equipment and beds in which to care for patients,” said Siva Anandaciva, the King’s Fund’s chief analyst. “If you look across all these indicators – beds, staffing, scanners – the UK is consistently below the average in the resources we give the NHS relative to countries such as France and Germany. Overall, the NHS does not have the level of resources it needs to do the job we all expect it to do, given our ageing and growing population, and the OECD data confirms that,” he added. The report concludes that, given the dramatic differences between Britain and other countries: “A general picture emerges that suggests the NHS is under-resourced.” The thinktank’s research found that the UK has the third-lowest number of doctors among the 21 nations, with just 2.8 per 1,000 people, barely half the number in Austria, which has 5.1 doctors per 1,000 of population. Similarly, the UK has the sixth-smallest number of nurses for its population: just 7.9 per 1,000 people – way behind Switzerland, which has the most: 18 nurses, more than twice as many. With hospital beds, the UK has just 2.6 for every 1,000 people, just over a third of the number in Germany, which has the most – 8.1 beds – and which places the UK 18th overall out of the 21 countries which the OECD gathered figures for. The number of hospital beds in England has halved over the last 30 years and now stands at about 100,000, though the NHS added about 4,000 more as an emergency measure in December, January and February to help it cope with the spike in patient numbers caused by the long, cold winter. Doctors’ leaders said the report showed that the NHS is “chronically underfunded” and is receiving £10bn less per year than it needs. “These statistics show that the UK has fewer beds per head compared to virtually all other EU nations, fewer doctors and nurses, reduced access to investigations such as MRI scans, and is spending less on medications,” said Dr Chaand Nagpaul, leader of the British Medical Association, which represents most of the NHS’s 240,000 doctors. “Taken together, these numbers translate into the painful reality afflicting the NHS daily, of a system under pressure with inadequate capacity to meet the health needs of the population. This is directly resulting in delays and is adversely affecting quality of care for patients. It is also causing unsustainable workload burdens on NHS staff, causing stress and burnout and affecting recruitment and retention.” The National Audit Office said in March that the NHS’s finances were “in a perilous state” and that the service was being hampered by having vacancies for 100,000 staff. Lord Darzi, a former Labour health minister, said last month that the NHS needed to receive a £50bn boost to its budget by 2020, taking it to £173bn. The Department of Health and Social Care said that the Commonwealth Fund, a global health thinktank, had ranked the NHS as the world’s best and most efficient health service. “As this analysis shows, spending on the NHS is in line with other European countries but it fails to acknowledge that funding is actually at record levels – £1.6bn is being invested in 2018-19, on top of a planned £10bn-a-year increase in its budget by 2020-21, with an extra £2bn and a further £150m for social care this year,” a spokeswoman said.
10||Trump’s dirty ops attack on Obama legacy shows pure hatred for Iran dealThe use of an Israeli private security firm to dig for dirt on senior members of the Obama administration linked to the Iran nuclear deal, as revealed in today’s Observer, shows how far President Donald Trump and the hawks around him are willing to go to destroy the agreement. The 2015 deal is the last major element of Barack Obama’s foreign policy legacy left standing, after nearly 16 months of the Trump era. The drive to unravel the agreement is both deeply personal – driven by Trump’s animus towards his predecessor – and global in its implications for international peace and security. The bid to discredit the deal – the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) – with compromising information on two of its fiercest advocates from the Obama administration came to nothing. Instead, Trump’s campaign against it has relied on the simple repetition of derogatory phrases about it being the “worst deal ever” and “a major embarrassment”. It has remained a fixed point in Trump’s universe. The struggle over JCPOA’s fate comes to a head at the end of this week, when Trump must choose whether to keep a set of sanctions suspended, or violate the deal by reviving them. Trump has reminded the world repeatedly that only he knows what he is going to do when the sanctions waivers fall due on Saturday, while hinting heavily that he will refuse to sign them. If that happens, JCPOA could collapse quickly, or more likely stumble on wounded and weakened a while longer before crashing. Either way, the prospect of a new conflict in the Middle East will draw closer. In view of these high stakes, European capitals are desperately seeking a compromise to satisfy Trump and salvage JCPOA by addressing the president’s complaints about the deal: that it does not address ballistic missile development or Iran’s role in conflicts across the region, and that some of the restrictions on Iran’s nuclear activities expire in the coming years. White House visits by France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, and German chancellor Angela Merkel failed to achieve a breakthrough, but UK foreign secretary Boris Johnson is due in Washington today to try his luck. Meanwhile, diplomats in London, Paris, Berlin and Washington (all parties to JCPOA) continue to exchange ideas on possible compromises. There is agreed text on tougher action towards Iran’s missiles and containing its regional expansion, but not so far on JCPOA’s “sunset clauses”. In any case there is no guarantee that the US officials involved in these exchanges have any sway with Trump himself. He promised to kill the deal and seems bent on delivering. And his resolve has scrambled global alignments. The Europeans find themselves in agreement with Russia, China and Iran, as well as much of the rest of the international community. The US, meanwhile, finds common cause with Israel, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. As the struggle has sharpened in the run-up to Trump’s day of judgment, the gambits on both sides have grown bolder. By flying, one by one, to Trump’s court in a bid to appease him, the Europeans risk exposing their impotence. For his part, Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, showed a sure feel for his audience of one on Monday with an extraordinary stunt, displaying an Israeli intelligence trove on Iran – which in normal times would be quietly shared with allied agencies – in the style of a Las Vegas show. With a showman’s flourish, Netanyahu ripped black sheets off bookcases of files and panels emblazoned with CD-roms, while screens displayed the message “Iran lied” in 3ft-high letters. The substance underlying the show did appear to be a remarkable intelligence coup – Iran’s nuclear weapons archive reportedly swiped from a Tehran warehouse in the middle of the night in January – but has so far only confirmed what was already known to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA): that Iran began a concerted weapons design project in 2002, but shelved it a year later, then continued some theoretical feasibility studies until 2009. It is not clear whether Netanyahu’s performance was intended to sway Trump, a counter-balance to Macron and Merkel, or to do the US president a favour by providing political cover for a decision he has already taken. Trump has set 12 May as a grand season finale, with himself at centre stage. However, even if he reimposes sanctions by refusing to sign a waiver it will not necessarily spell the end for JCPOA. The sanctions legislation in play is targeted at foreign countries and companies dealing with Iran’s central bank but contains exemptions for states that significantly reduce their purchases of Iranian oil. As preparations have been made, the US would have to give other countries some months to comply before targeting them, which could offer breathing space for more diplomacy. Another raft of sanctions waivers come up for renewal in mid-July, however, affecting shipping and a broad range of trade and investment. It would then be up to Europe and Iran to decide how to respond. Europe could comply or try to fight US sanctions, but big European companies, reliant on raising finance on the New York money markets, are likely to take fright and avoid dealings with Iran. Anger is already mounting in Iran over the absence of the promised economic benefits from the deal, and the disappearance of European companies can only make that worse. Hardliners who opposed any external constraints on the country’s nuclear ambitions are waiting in the wings. “The US looks like the non-compliant party now, so it doesn’t make much sense to shift the focus back to Iran,” said Ariane Tabatabai, an Iran expert at Georgetown University in Washington DC. “But there will be more and more pressure to loosely implement the deal as time goes by.” One of the first likely flashpoints is likely to be the IAEA inspections. The Israeli trove of documents is likely to prompt demands for visits to newly identified sites at a time when Iranian incentives to comply are at a minimum. In that scenario, European states might go along with US sanctions, but the rest of the world, including the big Asian markets for Iranian oil, would make their own decisions. “The Trump administration will find it harder than it expects to get countries to reduce their oil purchases,” said Peter Harrell, a former senior state department official who helped craft some of the Iran sanctions. For the Iran nuclear deal, Harrell added: “It is going to be a slow and messy end.”
3||The Observer view on Trump’s folly in risking not just peace in the Middle EastUnless he experiences a sudden, unexpected change of heart, Donald Trump will reactivate US sanctions on Iran next week and, by doing so, attempt to wreck the west’s landmark 2015 nuclear agreement with Tehran. The likely negative consequences of Trump’s decision, if confirmed, are wide-ranging and extremely serious. The full or partial restoration of two sets of unilateral, pre-2015 American banking, financial and other sanctions would significantly undermine the moderate leadership of Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani. Before his landslide re-election victory last year, Rouhani promised voters much-needed economic renewal in exchange for maintaining the nuclear-related curbs. Now his hardline opponents are poised to strike. The destabilising of Iran, consequent on what would be seen there as an overt act of American aggression, could trigger a broader destabilisation of the Middle East. Predominantly Shia, Persian Iran is engaged in a fierce contest for power and influence with the Sunni Arab world, led by Saudi Arabia. If Trump, allied with Riyadh and Cairo, goes on the offensive, this rivalry may escalate as Iran inevitably reacts – with unforeseeable ramifications in places such as Yemen and Bahrain. One concern is that Iran’s clerical establishment, led by the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, will revive a nuclear weapons research programme that, according to the Bush administration and the UN’s International Atomic Energy Agency, ceased in 2003. This would produce the very result Trump ostensibly seeks to avoid. This, in turn, could spark a regional nuclear weapons race with the Saudis and others. Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has long been lobbying Trump to end US adherence to the deal. Last week, he attempted to show that Iran was lying by unveiling a cache of stolen documents. Independent experts found nothing new in Netanyahu’s presentation. The IAEA, which has broad inspection rights, has verified 10 times, most recently in February, that Iran is in full compliance. But Trump hailed his ally’s PR stunt, with suspicious speed, as “proof” of Iranian cheating. As we reveal today, there have also been shockingly underhand efforts in the US to discredit key public officials associated with forging the deal. The alleged involvement of Trump aides in a privately run, Israeli-linked “dirty ops campaign” warrants immediate investigation. It recalls claims that Trump associates colluded with Russia to “dig up dirt” on Hillary Clinton before the 2016 presidential election. Leading figures in Israeli intelligence have warned Netanyahu that his aggressive stance does not serve his country’s best interests. Last week, Israeli forces again reportedly bombed Iranian targets inside Syria. Such confrontations are becoming regular occurrences. There is a clear danger, if tensions escalate further, that Israel could be sucked into an unwinnable, three-front war with Iranian Revolutionary Guards and Shia militias, the Assad regime, Lebanon’s Hezbollah and Hamas in Palestine. At the same time, it is surely not to Israel’s advantage to continue to exaggerate the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran when Israel itself possesses an estimated 200 nuclear warheads, has never subscribed (unlike Iran) to the non-proliferation treaty, and does not allow IAEA inspections. Sooner or later, Israel will be called to account for this double standard. For its part, Iran says the US has failed to keep faith with the spirit and letter of the 2015 agreement, arguing that promised economic and financial relief has not materialised. Leading European banks still refuse to do business there, chilled by fear of American displeasure. Trump’s Muslim travel ban, targeting Iran, is another case in point. All this illuminates a larger problem: Trump’s lack of respect for international law and multilateral conventions in general, such as the Paris climate change agreement. The Iran deal, signed by all five permanent members of the UN security council, plus Germany, was incorporated into international law by the UN. It is to all intents and purposes an international treaty. Yet Trump is poised unilaterally to abrogate it, to the lasting detriment of America’s standing in the world. The harm a Trump decision to scupper the Iran deal would do to US relations with its European partners, all of whom are adamant in its defence, is incalculable. Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, made a personal appeal to Trump during his recent Washington visit and was crudely rebuffed. The same fate befell Germany’s Angela Merkel. There is scant reason to believe any last-minute British intervention will fare better. A permanent rift is opening. There is no doubt that Iran’s actions in Syria, Yemen and elsewhere are cause for legitimate western concern, as is its expanding ballistic missile programme. Its human rights record is dreadful – witness its inexcusable treatment of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe and other dual citizenship British nationals. But these are separate problems. There is no evidence that Iran is cheating on the nuclear deal. It remains a notable diplomatic achievement. It is essential that it is preserved intact – and built upon. Ultimately, this is about much more than nuclear proliferation. It is about the credibility, unity – and common sense – of the western democracies in jointly managing the challenges thrown up by a dangerous world.
10||Revealed: Trump team hired spy firm for ‘dirty ops’ on Iran arms dealAides to Donald Trump, the US president, hired an Israeli private intelligence agency to orchestrate a “dirty ops” campaign against key individuals from the Obama administration who helped negotiate the Iran nuclear deal, the Observer can reveal. People in the Trump camp contacted private investigators in May last year to “get dirt” on Ben Rhodes, who had been one of Barack Obama’s top national security advisers, and Colin Kahl, deputy assistant to Obama, as part of an elaborate attempt to discredit the deal. The extraordinary revelations come days before Trump’s 12 May deadline to either scrap or continue to abide by the international deal limiting Iran’s nuclear programme. Jack Straw, who as foreign secretary was involved in earlier efforts to restrict Iranian weapons, said: “These are extraordinary and appalling allegations but which also illustrate a high level of desperation by Trump and [the Israeli prime minister] Benjamin Netanyahu, not so much to discredit the deal but to undermine those around it.” One former high-ranking British diplomat with wide experience of negotiating international peace agreements, requesting anonymity, said: “It’s bloody outrageous to do this. The whole point of negotiations is to not play dirty tricks like this.” Sources said that officials linked to Trump’s team contacted investigators days after Trump visited Tel Aviv a year ago, his first foreign tour as US president. Trump promised Netanyahu that Iran would never have nuclear weapons and suggested that the Iranians thought they could “do what they want” since negotiating the nuclear deal in 2015. A source with details of the “dirty tricks campaign” said: “The idea was that people acting for Trump would discredit those who were pivotal in selling the deal, making it easier to pull out of it.” According to incendiary documents seen by the Observer, investigators contracted by the private intelligence agency were told to dig into the personal lives and political careers of Rhodes, a former deputy national security adviser for strategic communications, and Kahl, a national security adviser to the former vice-president Joe Biden. Among other things they were looking at personal relationships, any involvement with Iran-friendly lobbyists, and if they had benefited personally or politically from the peace deal. Investigators were also apparently told to contact prominent Iranian Americans as well as pro-deal journalists – from the New York Times, MSNBC television, the Atlantic, Vox website and Haaretz, the Israeli newspaper among others – who had frequent contact with Rhodes and Kahl in an attempt to establish whether they had violated any protocols by sharing sensitive intelligence. They are believed to have looked at comments made by Rhodes in a 2016 New York Times profile in which he admitted relying on inexperienced reporters to create an “echo chamber” that helped sway public opinion to secure the deal. It is also understood that the smear campaign wanted to establish if Rhodes was among those who backed a request by Susan Rice, Obama’s final national security adviser, to unmask the identities of Trump transition officials caught up in the surveillance of foreign targets. Although sources have confirmed that contact and an initial plan of attack was provided to private investigators by representatives of Trump, it is not clear how much work was actually undertaken, for how long or what became of any material unearthed. Neither is it known if the black ops constituted only a strand of a wider Trump-Netanyahu collaboration to undermine the deal or if investigators targeted other individuals such as John Kerry, the lead American signatory to the deal. Both Rhodes and Kahl said they had no idea of the campaign against them. Rhodes said: “I was not aware, though sadly am not surprised. I would say that digging up dirt on someone for carrying out their professional responsibilities in their positions as White House officials is a chillingly authoritarian thing to do.” A spokesman for the White House’s national security council offered “no comment” when approached. However, the revelations are not the first time that claims of “dirty tricks” have been aimed at the Trump camp. Special counsel Robert Mueller is leading an investigation into apparent attempts by Trump’s inner-circle to dig up damaging information on Hillary Clinton during the 2016 presidential campaign. Of particular interest is a meeting involving the US president’s eldest son, Donald Trump Jr, his brother-in-law Jared Kushner and then-campaign chair Paul Manafort and a Kremlin-connected Russian lawyer who had promised damaging information about Clinton. Trump has repeatedly signalled his intention to scrap the Iran deal, denouncing it as “the worst deal ever.” In a January speech the US president accused his predecessor of having “curried favour with the Iranian regime in order to push through the disastrously flawed Iran nuclear deal.” Last Monday, Netanyahu, accused Iran of continuing to hide and expand its nuclear weapons know-how after the 2015 deal, presenting what he claimed was “new and conclusive proof” of violations. However, European powers including Britain responded by saying the Israeli prime minister’s claims reinforced the need to keep the deal. On Thursday the UN secretary general Antonio Guterres urged Trump not to walk away from the deal, warning that there was a real risk of war if the 2015 agreement was not preserved. The following day details emerged of some unusual shadow diplomacy by Kerry, meeting a top-ranking Iranian official in New York to discuss how to preserve the deal. It was the second time in around two months that Kerry had met foreign minister Javad Zarif to apparently strategise over rescuing a pact they spent years negotiating during the Obama administration. On Sunday Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, will arrive in Washington, hoping to persuade Trump to keep the deal, known as the joint comprehensive plan of action (JCPOA). Straw, who was foreign secretary between 2001 and 2006, said: “The campaign against the JCPOA has been characterised by abuse and misinformation. It is the best chance of ensuring Iran never develops a nuclear weapons programme, and it is insane to suggest abandoning the deal could do anything but endanger international security.”
8||Israel fears ‘explosion of violence’ as US prepares to open embassy in JerusalemPolice in Israel have started patrols and security sweeps of a southern Jerusalem neighbourhood, anxiously preparing for a US embassy inauguration that Israelis and Palestinians fear may launch a week of violence. The move on 14 May will mark the start of a potentially volatile week when Israel will celebrate its 70th anniversary and Palestinians mark the “catastrophe”, or Nakba, of their displacement on the 15th. Nakba day has previously seen violence as the Israeli army responds to demonstrations in the occupied territories. This year, tensions are far higher than usual. Six weeks of protests along the Gaza border, during which Israeli soldiers have shot dead nearly 40 people and wounded hundreds, will culminate that week. There are fears that those attending the rallies may attempt to breach the perimeter, a move that could lead to mass casualties as Israeli snipers are operating under rules of engagement that permit live fire. “The situation between Israelis and Palestinians could not be more delicate,” wrote Ilan Goldenberg, who served as part of the US team during the 2013-14 Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, in an opinion piece for the Israeli paper Haaretz. The embassy move, he said, may pass without significant violence, pointing to the lack of anticipated instability following Donald Trump’s December announcement to relocate the embassy. “Or it could explode – and we could find ourselves in the middle of a new war between Israel and Hamas in Gaza. Nobody knows, but it is irresponsible for the US to be dumping gasoline on this potential fire,” he said. Israel’s police spokesman, Micky Rosenfeld, said officers were assessing the level of security needed for theopening, including deploying CCTV cameras and guards in the Jerusalem neighbourhood of Arnona, where the current US consulate is being retrofitted to become the embassy. “We’re still waiting to see if the US president will come here for the opening move. The level of security will be raised accordingly,” he said. Trump has hinted he may attend, while Israeli media have speculated he will send his daughter Ivanka Trump and son-in-law Jared Kushner. Israeli police had not received information of any specific warnings, Rosenfeld said, but security forces were “taking into consideration the period we’re going to be in and other events, including Jerusalem celebrations and Nakba day. There are implications around the Gaza strip area, and of course the move with the American embassy as well. We’re talking about an intensive week,” he said. Jerusalem’s status has been a critical obstacle in peace negotiations, and international consensus is that sovereignty over the city should be agreed between the two sides. Palestinians claim East Jerusalem as a capital of a future independent state, but Israel captured it in 1967. It later annexed the city and claims the entire area as its “eternal and undivided” capital. On the weekend ahead of the embassy opening, thousands of Israelis are expected to mark what they say is the city’s reunification in a Jerusalem Day rally. Often made up of religious settlers, tThese marches pass through Muslim district of the Old City and in previous years groups have chanted anti-Arab insults. In the south, demonstrations in Gaza have been supported by Hamas, which rules the enclave and has fought three wars with Israel. With two-thirds of Gaza’s 2 million people being refugees or their descendants, protesters are demanding a “right to return” to their ancestral homes. “The intensity of these marches will reach its zenith on 14 May,” said Mkhaimar Abusada, a political scientist at Gaza’s Al-Azhar University. He said opening the embassy in a week in which Palestinians remember what they see as their defining tragedy is misguided. “It’s like the US is insisting on making the Palestinians remember this day as a very sad day in their history and in their struggle against the Israeli occupation,” he said. A week ago, a crowd of people moved towards the frontier, attempting to rip away barbed wire and set sections of the security fence on fire with burning tyres. Israel, which has rejected UN and EU calls for investigations into its use of live ammunition, accuses Hamas of exploiting civilians to break into its territory. “When you have tens of thousands of people around the border there is no control over them,” said Abusada. “It would be my assumption that some protesters will try to breach the fence, will try to infiltrate into Israel. ” The US embassy move will be preceded by the 12 May deadline for Trump to decide whether to walk away from the 2015 Iran nuclear agreement and reinstate sanctions on Tehran. Pulling out of the deal would add pressure on the Iranian leadership at a time when Israel has warned of open war and engaged in direct confrontation, targeting Iranian military sites in neighbouring Syria. Goldenberg said the “flood of huge events” could be overwhelming: “A toxic witches’ brew of political instability and further potential violence is stewing in the Middle East.”
13||Mike Summerbee credits Pep Guardiola with revolutionising English footballMike Summerbee has praised Manchester City’s total football style under Pep Guardiola, in which every player from goalkeeper to striker is technically astute. Summerbee was a key part of the City team that were champions 50 years ago under the management team of Joe Mercer and Malcolm Allison. The 75-year-old, now a club ambassador, believes that while the 1967-68 title winners had only a handful of star turns, Guardiola’s Premier League champions are filled with them. “Pep has a certain way,” said Summerbee. “I watch them train occasionally and I think he has revolutionised football in this country. He has a group of people who think and play [his] way – they all have great skills on the ball, first touches, and know what to do with the ball. “They play in a small area where you have to think on your feet. They do that until they see a gap, and then it’s like opening the lock on a safe. Every player is so skilful. In our day you probably had four players who were really top-notch, who could open the game up, but nowadays, everyone can play. All can control and pass the ball. “It’s rare you see a misplaced pass. But conditions today suit the way it’s played. You cannot compare the side I played in with the side playing now – it’s impossible.” While Summerbee does not like comparisons, he believes some from his era could play under Guardiola. “You could put certain players in this era and they could play – you could put George Best in it, or Colin Bell, or Francis Lee. They could play that way as they had that first touch.” The latter two were team-mates in the side that pipped Best’s Manchester United to the title on the final day. “If you want to compare, they look alike and they play similarly: Colin Bell and [Kevin] De Bruyne. Two big engines, they can pass the ball, have pace. If any players out of this side and my side compare, it’s those two.” Allison was, like Guardiola, an innovator. “He could change the way you played,” said Summerbee. “At Swindon I played as an extra full-back – but in my first game [for City] against Middlesbrough, I laid on the equaliser for Jimmy Murray to score. “On the coach Malcolm told me: ‘We’ve just spent £35,000 on you and we didn’t buy a full-back. We bought a winger. Don’t come back past the halfway line because you can’t defend.’ “He told me that beating my man and crossing it was all he wanted me to do – he put it into my brain. He had the same idea as Pep, that the best form of defence is attack. We had some good defenders – Tony Book, Alan Oakes, Glyn Pardoe until he broke his leg, and Mike Doyle, all top-flight players.” Summerbee also pointed to Guardiola’s common touch that has helped build spirit within the club. “I’d like to see him stay for ever,” said Summerbee. “He’s a nice man; he knows everybody from the cleaners by their name. I always find in life, whether it’s a cricketer, footballer, manager or whatever – Pep Guardiola, Bill Nicholson, Sir Gareth Edwards, Pelé, the late, great Sir Bobby Moore – people that I’ve mixed with, the more famous and great they are, the more humble they are. The ones who think they are great can be difficult. “You talk to him and [he knows I’m] Mike Summerbee: who’s Mike Summerbee? He’s worked with people like Lionel Messi. The current team have got a great atmosphere. You get on the plane with them and you see coaches, kit-men and players all together, playing music. There’s a great atmosphere. There’s no difference in atmosphere from my day to this day.” Summerbee was close friends with Best, which is illustrated by what occurred despite the Northern Irishman’s disappointment at United’s failure to retain the title in 1967-68. “I’d agreed to meet George Best about one o’clock in the morning in the Cabaret Club [in Manchester],” said Summerbee. “I got there about quarter past one and he was there. He could have bottled it but he was there and we went out. People don’t understand what a nice person he was.”
10||Trump White House accuses China of 'Orwellian nonsense'The White House on Saturday condemned Chinese efforts to control how US airlines refer to Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau as “Orwellian nonsense”. The harshly worded statement came as a high-level trade delegation led by the treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin returned from negotiations in China. The carriers were told to remove references on their websites or in other material that suggests Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau are part of countries independent from China, US and airline officials said. Taiwan is China’s most sensitive territorial issue. Beijing considers the self-ruled, democratic island a wayward province. Hong Kong and Macau are former European colonies that are now part of China but run largely autonomously. A spokesman for Airlines for America, a trade group representing United Airlines, American Airlines and other major carriers, said the group was “continuing to work with US government officials as we determine next steps”. In January, Delta Air Lines, following a demand from China over listing Taiwan and Tibet as countries on its website, apologized for making “an inadvertent error with no business or political intention” and said it had taken steps to resolve the issue. Also in January, China suspended Marriott International’s Chinese website for a week, punishing the world’s biggest hotel chain for listing Tibet, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau as separate countries in a customer questionnaire. On Saturday, White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said in a statement that Donald Trump “ran against political correctness in the United States” and as president would “stand up for Americans resisting efforts by the Chinese Communist party to impose Chinese political correctness on American companies and citizens”. China’s Civil Aviation Administration has demanded the change from 36 foreign carriers, including some American carriers, the White House said. “This is Orwellian nonsense and part of a growing trend by the Chinese Communist party to impose its political views on American citizens and private companies,” Sanders said, adding that the Trump administration is calling on China “to stop threatening and coercing American carriers and citizens”. In trade talks this week, the Trump administration demanded a $200bn cut in China’s trade surplus with the US by 2020, sharply lower tariffs and a halt to subsidies for advanced technology, people familiar with the talks said on Friday. Trump tweeted on Friday that he would meet with US trade officials once they returned. “It is hard for China in that they have become very spoiled with US trade wins!” Trump wrote. On Saturday, speaking at a Republican event in Cleveland, Trump said: “My group just got back from China. We’re going to have to rework China because that’s been a one-way street for decades.” “We can’t go on that way,” he said, although he also said he has a lot respect for Chinese president Xi Jinping. Also on Saturday, the secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, spoke with a member of the Communist party leadership. Pompeo and Politburo member Yang Jiechi “affirmed the importance of a constructive, results-oriented bilateral relationship”, state department spokeswoman Heather Nauert said in a statement.
13||Everton 1-1 Southampton: Premier League – as it happenedOk, that concludes that. Thanks for joining us. Here’s the match report from Paul Wilson. Sam Allardyce speaks. The only highlight today for us [the goal]. It was an anguishing performance. It was very disappointing. We had a blip and we nicked something we didn’t deserve. We haven’t entertained the fans at home. The lads that stepped in didn’t step up to the mark. As hard as they tried, we were not a great attacking force...we went to the last whistle. At the end of the day it was our passing that let us down. If we are going to get better we are going to need change. [On his future] One never knows in this game. Angry Mark Hughes speaks. Very angry Mark Hughes. We clearly haven’t got what we deserve. I put that at the door of the referee. He’s given them a free-kick and allowed it to be taken from a false position. He’s given free-kicks when out guys haven’t been touched. To say we are aggrieved is an understatement. I thought we were magnificent today. It’s a huge game with Swansea and that will probably decide who goes down. We have done everything right apart from the last moment. I am really upset with the officials. Come Tuesday, we’ll go again. Nathan Redmond, man of the match speaks, and is complaining about the free-kick he conceded and led to the equaliser. “He’s got to slow the game down, we tried to catch them on the break... It’s been taken out of our hand....It’s my first goal this season. I couldn’t care less as long as we are staying in the Premier League...the gaffer told me to try and take us forward. [Swansea is a] big game, as i said. We need to take this point, and pick up as many points as we can.” Matters at Wembley were a little more clearcut. So, it’s all on Southampton v Swansea on Tuesday. Three points at Goodison would have bought breathing space. Not now, and Hughes has to lift the spirits of a team denied at the death in the most demoralising way possible. Mark Hughes had a word with Jon Moss about his timekeeping, a stern word, in fact. Meanwhile, Everton’s lap of appreciation will take place in front of an empty stadium. Perhaps they can clap each other. Southampton did what they did last week against Bournemouth and panicked as they tried to hold on to their lead. This time, they were unlucky, but paid for their caution and some rash decisions. Yoshida’s dismissal put them on the back foot, and somehow Everton got something from a game they barely competed in for much of the game. Boos from the home fans, despair for the Saints fans and a full minute after the allotted time added on. West Brom, meanwhile, are still breathing. Amazing stuff. Oh my! Tom Davies’ shot took an awful deflection off Hoedt. Saints failed to clear their lines and paid the price. 94 mins: Into the last knockings now. McCarthy flaps at the ball. 94 mins: Pandemonium mounts but Hoedt bought time in the corner. 93 mins: A great free-kick and an even better save from Alex McCarthy. 92 mins: In the stands, the boos are beginning to coagulate into rebellion. Hoedt’s foul gives away a free-kick and Leighton Baines will hit it. 91 mins: A break in play as Cedric goes down injured gives Southampton chance to regroup. 90 mins: Klaassen takes the ball down and shoots. Illegally, says the referee. There will be four minutes of added time. 89 mins: Added time approaches. 88 mins: Southampton again smuggle the ball clear, and it’s Redmond who carries it. This time, though, Everton come forward. Klaassen is trying his best to get involved, but his team-mates’ movement is sluggish. 87 mins: Redmond is the man of this match, easily the best attacking player on show, and as the first half barely occurred, it doesn’t matter that he only came on at half-time. 85 mins: Nathan Redmond, on his own again, forces another Pickford save. A second yellow after a loose challenge. And Southampton will have to retreat even further back. 83 mins: Ward-Prowse takes on a free-kick. Pickford saves. 82 mins: Meanwhile, in the stands, Everton fans are asking Sam Allardyce to go forth and multiply. Hearts and minds not completely won over, then. 81 mins: Southampton get away a Baines free-kick and Redmond is on a solo mission. This time, he takes on the shot. It flies over. 80 mins: Substitution: On comes Klaassen to one hell of a cheer, and he arrives in place of Phil Jagielka. 79 mins: First, a Southampton corner, or a pair of them. James Ward-Prowse is taking his time over these. His second swung out of play. 78 mins: Davy Klaassen, who cost £24m, and has not played a league game since September, is coming on. 77 mins: Schneiderlin booked for a hacking foul. 76 mins: Substitution: Off comes Austin for Shane Long, perhaps the best defensive striker in the business. They used to say that about Ade Akinbiyi, another player who had problems in front of goal. 74 mins: Redmond, showing the attacking flair that Pep Guardiola demands of him, burst through there and looked to have a sight on goal. He checked back. Saints looking wobbly all of a certain, uncertain, in fact. 72 mins: Everton on the attack. Schneiderlin on the flank centres the ball and it’s panic stations as Southampton eventually get the ball clear. There could be plenty of that to come in the remaining minutes of this game. 71 mins: So, Southampton’s creative hub has departed the scene, and is replaced by a dead-ball specialist. Looks like Mark Hughes is trying to hang on here. 70 mins: Substitution for Saints: Tadic off for James Ward-Prowse. 69 mins: Jagielka has to take evasive action as another Southampton overload on the wing looked to have Bertrand in a scoring position, 68 mins: So, the minutes tick down on West Brom’s brave attempt to escape. Ten points from a possible 12 and it won’t be enough. 66 mins: Schneiderlin gets room to play a pass through, but he also plays it too hard. 65 mins: An actual Everton attack. Niasse controls the ball, carves out space and booms in a cross. Tosun is just too short to get there. 64 mins: Redmond was nearly in for another, but just lost the flight of the ball as it came in. 62 mins: Boos as Leighton Baines overhits a pass. This could get nasty. 61 mins: On the sidelines, Allardyce is chewing gum like a cow attacking some finest cud. Oddly, he seems less secure in his job than the man stood alongside him, Hughes. Both are adopting alpha male stances of the type favoured by those in the Conservative Party. 60 mins: So in going two up front, Big Sam has made his second tactical change in a matter of minutes. He had to do something. That lap of appreciation will be outnumbered by the taxi queue at Lime Street if this continues for Everton. 59 mins: What does it all mean? Southampton will climb to 16th and West Brom will go down if this stays the same. 57 mins: Everton substitution: Niasse comes on for Vlasic. 57 mins: Well, well. The first quality of the game and Southampton lead. Tadic ball out to Cedric, some quality at last and Nathan Redmond nods in on the back post. Boos from the home fans, roars of hope from the away contingent. Saints alive! 54 mins: Tadic takes that and Tosun gets a rare touch, though had to be back on his own goal-line to get it. The set piece play has been of the same standard as the open play. 53 mins: Bertrand wins a corner and the applause of Saints fans. 52 mins: Set pieces are the key to this game and Everton have one. Baines nine-irons it into the box. Coleman couldn’t get to it, and Hoedt clears. 51 mins: TV pictures show some very bored fans. Some are reduced to cheering a Pickford hack of a clearance. 50 mins: On the pitch? No, still nothing. Sorry about that. 48 mins: Let us remember that Southampton are in the bottom three and have won just two Premier League matches in 2018. And still Sam Allardyce puts on the belt and braces. 46 mins: That’s bringing on a centre-half for an attacking player by Sam Allardyce. At half-time. OK, it’s to amend his system to match Southampton’s but such things do not win over Everton fans craving entertainment. Half-time subs: Nathan Redmond on for Lamina for Southampton, and the utterly anonymous Bolasie has gone off for Ramiro Funes Mori. Another game in deadlock is being played at Wembley. It must be the weather. https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2018/may/05/arsenal-v-chelsea-womens-fa-cup-final-live Hey John, Big ups for the Flaming Lips reference! I used to see them in small clubs in the early 90’s. They were great. Haven’t listened to them much in the last 15 or so years. This game stinks. These teams stink. As a Baggies fan it’s probably too much to ask Everton to do a goal. They stink. Did I mention that already? -- J.R. in Illinois A Mr HMSH emails in: “The things I do to follow this football team, usually it means staying up late at night (with work following the morning), but I’ve got pure luxury this time, I can watch the game on a small, very dated TV and I have beer, and it’s only midnight! Shame the football still isn’t great, mind.” Good for you. Want some red-hot Euro action and involving someone on loan from Everton? Course you do. Paul, an Evertonian, emails in: “Staying up with Big Sam or relegation whilst retaining a modicum of entertainment..... I know where my money is.. Not in Sam’s pocket!” What can we conclude from that? If this is to be Allardyce’s final home game in charge of Everton it appears he wants to protect that record of having only lost to Manchester City at home; that appears the very apex of his ambition. And as for Southampton, their problems this season are laid a little bare by being really not very good, and especially in attack. It would seem to rely on Tadic coming up with something. 45 mins: And that’s it, a blessed relief. In terms of entertainment, utterly hopeless. And the boos are loud from the home fans. Everton have been, to put it politely, conservative. Southampton have had plenty of the ball but have been largely inept with it as soon as the Everton 18-yard box hoves into view. 45 mins: One minute of added time... 44 mins: Thank you to the anonymous caller who sent in a picture of their bottle of beer. 43 mins: Lamina leaves the field to come back on again. He will probably get until half-time. 41 mins: Lamina down with an injury again. Mark Hughes shows he hasn’t lost his ability to kill a ball stone dead with his chest when it flies to the sidelines. Perhaps the most entertaining moment of this drabness. 39 mins: A glint of an opening for Southampton is snuffed out by Baines cutting off Austin just as the striker was shaping for a shot. 38 mins: Tadic goes for power and hits the wall. A waste. Cedric Soares follows up with a garryowen hoof into the air. That’s about the size of this game. 38 mins: Another set-piece, this time for Saints. Long way out. What will Tadic try here? 37 mins: Leighton Baines’ ball is collected well by Alex McCarthy, who had to climb high to get to it. 36 mins: A bit of rage from the stands as the ball doesn’t go forward quick enough for Everton. They do, though, cheer a free-kick. 33 mins: How many will stay for Everton’s “lap of appreciation” afterwards? A guess at this stage will be that Goodison will be only half-full once Wayne and his lads take the stage. 32 mins: Again, Southampton dominant in possession but unable to find a final pass. Everton meanwhile showing very little in the way of ambition. 31 mins: Bertrand is down, Lamina is also carrying a knock. Perhaps that is the source of Hughes’ latest grimace. Both carry on for now. 30 mins: Mark Hughes looking unamused, though he is not one for the smiles, really, is he? 28 mins: Better now from Saints. Tadic is finding his men with passes. A couple of hurried clearances from Everton. Romeu’s shot was deflected and Pickford could only palm clear. 26 mins: Tadic takes a free-kick short and it finds Bertrand. Another cloven-hooved overhit of the ball. Memories of Nacho Monreal on Thursday, a left-back finding space and troubling Row Z (Cars). 25 mins: Yoshida and his pink robots bang into Davies, and there is a meek claim for an Everton penalty. Not that anyone actually cares that much. Or so it appears. 23 mins: Southampton keep getting forced back in their attempts to build attacks. Neither team have much in the way of flow. 21 mins: Free-kick chance for Everton. Tosun got bundled over. Tom Davies chips in, and it comes to naught as a foul was committed as the ball was being played. At times like this it is easy to sympathise with the disaffected at Goodison. 19 mins: Oooh, close. Michael Keane makes a mistake and Austin swings his boot at the loose ball. Neat, punched save from Pickford. Better play all round. 17 mins: This is bitty stuff. Can Southampton really be trying to play for a draw? That’s one hell of a risky strategy. 15 mins: Austin got away from Everton’s defence but offside called. He was onside but perhaps the official didn’t believe Austin could get so clear without being offside. Not good for Mark Hughes’ blood pressure, such decisions. 13 mins: TV pictures there showed Wayne Rooney with his brood of sons. All, of course, clad in Evertonian blue. 12 mins: Lamina dispossessed Gueye, but he was penalised for a foul. At the other end, Tosun nods over. First attempt at goal for Everton? 10 mins: Pressure now from Southampton. Plenty of possession, moving the ball just fine but without ever looking like they can open up Everton. 9 mins: Tadic had a chance to set up Austin but like Bertrand before, a heavy touch. Nerves there, perhaps? 7 mins: Not a lot happening on the pitch at the moment, not much urgency from Southampton. It is a mark of Allardyce teams to start slow, keep shape and then launch later on. Or, as can often happen, to stay slow and in shape. 5 mins: A reminder of how Tom Davies togs up when out on the town. 4 mins: Ryan Bertrand, one of those players who will surely be playing Premier League football next season whatever happens, booms a cross a little too high. He had time and space, too. 3 mins: Goodison not exactly brimming with end of season fervour, though Tom Davies’ shot, just wide of the post, lifts the noise level up a tad. 2 mins: Southampton start with some early pressure. Everton begin with a couple of long balls, as is their manager’s wont. 1 min: Referee Jon Moss, from the Church of the Poisoned Mind, gets the game underway. Wayne Rooney, it seems, injured his knee in training yesterday, which sounds a little ominous. Everton wait on a scan, which may not be good news for those who would want him gone from the club. The sound of Z Cars’ theme tune means that we are away at Goodison Park. They also play it at Watford’s Vicarage Road, though for reasons I am not aware of. Z Cars was based in Merseyside. Sam Allardyce speaks: “It’s the last home game, full house, all sold out and we’ll try to keep the home record up. Our problem is the injuries. It’s left us a little light on the front end. The situation is we have to contain Southampton. We want to be the first to score. That puts them under more pressure. It’s a little different than a normal game. They have a different system to us and we’ll have to see how it pans out.” Mark Hughes speaks: “It’s a huge game. We’ve put ourselves in a position where we have got a fighting chance. We just have to get on with our own business, and affect our own future. Everton are a team in decent form and it’s not going to to be easy.” What does relegation feel like? Ask Paul Lambert. Also in this tea-time slot is the Women’s FA Cup final from Wembley. Join Scott Murray for that. It was Jake Livermore with that fateful goal and it’s full-time and three points for West Brom at the Hawthorns. It might not be enough for the Baggies, but that’s serious pressure on Southampton. And West Brom have scored. They are still alive! That means Saints have to win to terminate Darren Moore’s Red Adair act. Mark Hughes, meanwhile, has stayed with the Southampton team that beat Bournemouth last week. Charlie Austin over Shane Long it is. After all, Saints need to score. And on the bench, it’s the rarely spotted Davy Klaassen, he who could have joined Napoli in January but decided to stay. The news there is no Wayne Rooney or Theo Walcott for Everton. Both are out with injury. Yannick Bolasie and Tom Davies come in for the former stars of the future. Everton: Pickford, Coleman, Jagielka, Keane, Baines, Gueye, Schneiderlin, Vlasic, Davies, Bolasie, Tosun. Subs: Martina, Niasse, Klaassen, Funes Mori, Robles, Kenny, Baningime. Southampton: McCarthy, Bednarek, Yoshida, Hoedt, Cedric, Romeu, Lemina, Bertrand, Tadic, Austin, Hojbjerg. Subs: Stephens, Long, Ward-Prowse, Gabbiadini, Redmond, McQueen, Forster. Referee: Jonathan Moss (County Durham) As it stands, results are pretty going Southampton’s way, with West Brom being held by Spurs and Swansea losing at Bournemouth. West Ham winning at Leicester is not so good news, but with Saints still to play Swans matters are their hands, to coin the relegation cliche. Anyway, Rob Smyth is on clockwatch duty. With Stoke going down, Mark Hughes has one hand on a disastrous entry on his CV. Should he be unable to arrest Southampton’s sink to the Championship, he would become the first manager to manage two relegated teams in one Premier League season. It had been done before in the sepia, pre-1992 football age, and twice. Ron Saunders suffered it with Birmingham City in 1985-6 and Billy McNeill followed up the next year with Manchester City and Aston Villa. So, a select band to join/avoid. Of course, Hughes and Saints fans may be heartened by news from elsewhere with both Swansea and West Brom skirting the trapdoor and playing earlier. But should Saints need to get a win to add to their scratchy, nervous defeat of Bournemouth last week, then they have Sam Allardyce in their way. Hughes has been notably complimentary to Big Sam this week, since Big Sam on a trolling mission is someone to be avoided. Just ask those Everton fans who his every media appearance appears to be delivered with a smirk. “It’s an entertainment game, you’re trying to capture hearts and minds, and certainly I think, particularly from a home point of view, we’ve achieved that,” he said this week. A sizeable group of Evertonians disagree, though as ever, Sam points to the figures - 14 points from seven games. He’s never been relegated from the Premier League, either. Mark Hughes would love to be able to say the same.
0||Harry Brook outshines big names to give Yorkshire hope against EssexJonny Bairstow, Alastair Cook and Joe Root are all on show here at one of the more extraordinary Championship matches in recent memory. But it is a star in the making, the teenager Harry Brook, who shone brightest with his maiden century as Yorkshire kept their hopes of a remarkable comeback win alive by setting Essex a target of 238 on day two and restricting them to 97 for four. England’s under-19s captain had posted a top score of 38 in seven previous first-class appearances, though he had shown enough in every one to suggest a much better return was close. And, in many ways, this was the perfect time to prove that correct with 124 off 187 balls. After being bowled out for 50 in the first innings on Friday – Yorkshire’s lowest total since 1973 – and conceding a lead of 92, they were up against it in testing batting conditions again yesterday. Brook was even replaced as opener by Bairstow as the visitors aimed to put the pressure back on to the champions. He arrived at the crease midway through the first evening and played superbly from No 3, taking a particular liking to Simon Harmer’s off-spin, regularly advancing down the pitch and lofting him over cover. It suggested a supreme confidence against spin, something that should take him a long way. He started day two unbeaten on 57 with Yorkshire at 161 for two and leading by 69 and advanced towards three figures – off 129 balls – for the first time with some comfort. A former Sedbergh School pupil, Brook moved from 90 to 98 by crunching Harmer twice through the covers for four. By this time he was in unison with the England Test captain, Root, who avoided his second duck in the match and made 35. Root must have been mighty impressed by a 19-year-old who has often spoken of the simplest of game plans: “It’s just see ball, hit ball,” he has been heard to say on more than one occasion. The pair hugged in celebration. Yorkshire will be frustrated, however, at not making the most of Brook’s work given they were very much on top midway through the afternoon at 276 for three, leading by 184. Either side of the second new ball their last seven wickets fell for 53, the first of which was Root bowled off the inside edge as he drove at Ravi Bopara’s medium pacers. Brook was then caught at long-on having miscued Harmer. In falling to spin in this instance, his strength proved to be his downfall. Peter Siddle finished with four wickets and eight in the match before Essex’s chase got off to a stuttering start, with Cook dropped on 20 in the slips before being bowled as he attempted to play Steve Patterson to leg for 26. Later in the 10th over, Patterson trapped Tom Westley lbw for his third straight duck, leaving the score at 34 for two. The metronomic seamer then struck twice more shortly afterwards before Dan Lawrence and Ryan ten Doeschate steadied. The Surrey captain, Rory Burns, having started day two on 137, fell seven short of a second career double century as his side posted a first-innings 434 against Worcestershire at the Oval before the visitors started their reply strongly. It was a similar story for Somerset, who scored 429 against Lancashire at Old Trafford. Keaton Jennings then reached 91 not out in a reply of 217 for two. In Division Two the South Africa Test opener Aiden Markram scored his third duck in three innings as Durham struggled against Leicestershire at the Riverside. Warwickshire are closing in on a home win over Derbyshire.
0||Saracens step up a gear to cruise past Gloucester as Alex Goode excelsSaracens sauntered to the play-offs after yet another second-half siege laid Gloucester to waste. They have now not conceded a second-half point in four matches – it was 40 unanswered here – and are hell-bent on returning to Twickenham later this month. Wasps will be the visitors in the semi-finals but after another nine-try showing, Mark McCall’s side are coming to the boil perfectly. Their day in the sun was tempered by concerning injuries to Liam Williams (shoulder) and Schalk Burger (hamstring) but they demonstrated an ability to race through the gears in the second half. “The lesson we got at Leinster [in the Champions Cup] was that against really top teams in semi- and quarter-finals there are no second chances,” said the Saracens director of rugby, Mark McCall. Gloucester’s bright points were restricted to an excellent opening 40 minutes from their New Zealand-born, England-qualified full-back, Jason Woodward, in front of the watching Paul Gustard, and a blistering start to first-team rugby from Tom Seabrook. Gustard will surely have noted Alex Goode’s excellence, too. Both he and Woodward are the form full-backs in the Premiership this season yet neither have registered recently on England’s radar. While those wearing the No15 jerseys shone, it was the wingers making their mark on the scoreboard and that all four scored tries within the opening 17 minutes revealed everything about the laissez-faire attitude of both sides. It was hardly surprising as Saracens were already guaranteed to finish second and, while Gloucester had the chance to cement a top-six spot, 11 changes were evidence that Friday’s Challenge Cup final is the priority. Nonetheless they were first on the scoreboard through their 19-year-old Seabrook, who dotted down less than a minute into his first-team debut after a fine break from Woodward. Saracens responded after a bit of magic from Schalk Brits led to Sean Maitland over in the left corner but Gloucester were ahead again with Woodward once more the architect, breaking free of two tackles down the left before feeding David Halaifonua inside. Two minutes later Williams stepped inside and plunged through a pile of bodies for 12-12. An Owen Farrell penalty gave Saracens a three-point lead and, when the England playmaker cruised under the posts on the stroke of half-time,, after Alex Lozowski’s break, Gloucester’s goose seemed cooked. Juan Figallo barrelled over within seconds of the restart before Maro Itoje and Chris Wyles went over in quick succession towards the right. This led to a raft of substitutions – Saracens were caused such disruption that Ben Spencer and Ben Earl ended up on the wings and Goode at fly-half – but a penalty try ended the mini-drought in points before Ben Spencer’s late double. Gloucester finish the season in seventh but already assured of a place in next season’s Champions Cup and they can end a promising campaign with silverware in Friday’s showdown with Cardiff Blues in Bilbao. “We must come in with a positive frame of mind on Monday,” said the Gloucester head coach, Johan Ackermann. “It’s a massive challenge but it’s a must that we perform for 80 minutes.” Premiership roundup: Banahan treble helps Bath run riot Matt Banahan scored three of Bath’s nine tries on his farewell appearance as the home side sneaked into next season’s European Champions Cup after a 63-19 win over London Irish at the Rec. Since Sale and Gloucester lost without a losing bonus point, Bath leapfrogged both to clinch sixth place in the table having been all but written off only a couple of weeks ago. It took them three minutes to open the scoring through Taulupe Faletau, who signed a new contract last week. Banahan combined on the right with Cooper Vuna, who found the Wales No 8 with an inside pass. No one would have begrudged the visitors a try and it came just short of the hour as their flanker Josh McNally stretched over the line. Greig Tonks hit the post with his conversion attempt to leave the score at 49-5 before Bath ran up the score. Northampton finished a difficult season with a rousing bonus point victory over Worcester at Franklin’s Gardens. Tries from No 8 Mitch Eadie, centre Nafi Tuitavake, full-back Ben Foden and wing Tom Collins ensured a 32-24 victory that means Saints end the campaign ninth. Their fly-half, James Grayson, kicked three conversions and a penalty and Stephen Myler added another penalty. The Worcester centres Will Butler (2) and Ben Te’o grabbed their side’s tries, with fly-half Dorian Jones converting all three and adding a second-half penalty.
13||Arsenal 1-3 Chelsea: 2018 Women's FA Cup final, as it happenedAnyway, that’s your lot for this MBM, because Suzanne Wrack was at Wembley ... and her big verdict is in! Enjoy, enjoy. Congratulations to Chelsea, commiserations to Arsenal, and good evening to you all. Gabby Logan has just made a magnificent Bachmann-Kirby Overdrive pun on the BBC. That knocks Gary Lineker’s wordplay into a cocked hat. It’s got to be worth some sort of award. Is there not a Pulitzer category for this sort of thing? The prize-giving ceremony. Arsenal go up to collect their runner-up medals. Grim faces, understandably. And then it’s the turn of Chelsea, led by their captain Katie Chapman, who has now won this competition an astonishing ten times! The entire squad congregates. Chapman hoists the silverware, with the help of Maren Mjelde! These remarkable women celebrate, and Wembley erupts! Fran Kirby speaks! “We were disappointed that we let them get the goal, so luckily I managed to score straight after. I had a feeling that we were going to win. Individual awards were great, but the main ones are what you win with your team. That’s more important to me.” The brilliant Bachmann, the official player of the match, is beside herself with joy. “It’s an amazing feeling. Every footballer dreams to one day play at Wembley, and to win feels amazing! I haven’t scored that much this year: it’s not important when you have Fran to your side, who scores all the time! It doesn’t matter who scores, though it was an amazing feeling to score in front of so many people!” Chelsea race to their fans, in full-on Cavort Mode! They’ve won their club’s second FA Cup; Arsenal are stuck on 14. Ramona Bachmann scored two wonderful goals after the break; then Fran Kirby added a brilliant third, just when it looked as though Arsenal might hustle their way back into the match thanks to Vivianne Miedema’s strike. They were by far the better side today ... and they’re applauded by a deflated but sporting Arsenal. Chelsea deservedly win the 2018 FA Women’s Cup! The Ramona Bachmann final. What a second-half performance! 90 min +4: Kirby, who has been quite superb this evening, second only to her team-mate Bachmann, dribbles to the corner and earns another time-management corner. 90 min +3: Chelsea pin Arsenal back in their final third. Time marches on. 90 min +2: Kirby slaloms in from the left, evading three challenges in ball-glued-to-boot style. That’s a showstopping display of skill. Shame about the following overhit pass to Cuthbert, who would have been free down the middle otherwise. Instead she’s pushed out to the right, where the attack fizzles out, not that it really matters now. 90 min +1: The resulting corner comes to nothing, as the first of five extra minutes elapses. 90 min: Aluko flashes down the right and sends a rising shot towards the top right. It’s a fine effort, tipped around the post in slightly uncertain fashion by van Veenendaal. 89 min: O’Reilly curls a ball into the Chelsea box from the right, but nobody in red can get anywhere near. Kirby goes up the other end, but over-elaborates with Aluko down the right. A highly entertaining second half is petering out. By way of illustration, on the BBC, Jonathan Pearce is riffing on vegetable soup. 87 min: It’s all scrappy. Chelsea are more than happy with this state of affairs. Arsenal can’t get anything going in attack, and time is not their friend. 85 min: Bachmann, the two-goal Chelsea hero, is replaced by Aluko. Cuthbert sends a screamer inches wide of the left-hand post from 25 yards. 84 min: A double switch for Arsenal, as Mitchell and Evans are replaced by Carter and McCabe. 82 min: Cuthbert runs hard at Mitchell, who has been targeted relentlessly by Chelsea down the right today. Cuthbert spins adroitly and breaks clear into the box, but the angle she faces is tight and she can’t find a team-mate with a cross. 80 min: O’Reilly scraps with Eriksson as she tries to make her way into the Chelsea box from the right. She tumbles to the ground and claims a penalty, but it looked like a 50-50 challenge that was outside the box anyway. The referee waves play on. 78 min: Arsenal look visibly deflated. No wonder, having fought their way back into the match. Kirby simply wasn’t having any of it. What a response! ... Kirby comes again, picking up a pass from Blundell on the right. She cuts inside, nips past a flailing Quinn, and curls hard into the bottom left! Chelsea’s star has restored her team’s two goal lead within three minutes! 76 min: Chelsea try to respond through Kirby, who dribbles hard down the inside-left channel. But Arsenal slam the door shut. Never mind, though, because ... 75 min: Spence, spent, is replaced by Cuthbert. Mead dribbles brilliantly along the byline to the left of the Chelsea goal. She pulls the ball back for Miedema, who whips a first-time shot into the bottom right! That came out of nothing, and this isn’t over yet! 72 min: Spence strips Nobbs in the centre circle and races towards the Arsenal box. For a second, this looks dangerous, but Spence seems to lose a little confidence as she nears the box, and instead of shooting - it would have been a glorious solo goal - she hesitates and loses possession. 71 min: A period of possession for Arsenal in the midfield. But there’s a sense that Chelsea are happy to let them have it. Arsenal aren’t doing anything to launch an attack. 70 min: Chelsea make their first swap. Andersson is replaced by Thorisdottir. 69 min: Bright strokes a glorious ball down the right to release Spence. But the flag goes up for offside, and Arsenal breathe again. 67 min: Kirby and Ji are close to opening up Arsenal down the left, but the final pass goes wrong. Arsenal look defeated at the moment. Can the 14-time winners find the extra gear they need to mount a comeback? 65 min: Today’s attendance at Wembley is a very impressive 45,423. That’s a record for a Women’s FA Cup final! This is a sport finally getting the credit and respect it deserves. Ramona Bachmann has delivered a performance to match. 63 min: Arsenal make the first change of the evening. Janssen is replaced by the more attack-minded O’Reilly. 62 min: Williamson brings down Spence, to the left of the Arsenal box. Eriksson whips the free kick high and hard to the far post. Mjelde rises and plants a header towards the top right. Van Veenendaal claims well. Arsenal are seriously rocking here. This is sensational. Bachmann, floating on air, drops a shoulder to lay waste Mitchell down the right. She regally enters the box, and curls towards the top left. The ball takes a deflection off Quinn en route to the corner, but take nothing away from the run and shot. The Matthews cup final ... the Gerrard cup final ... the Bachmann cup final. 59 min: Space for Spence down the right. She hooks into the Chelsea box, looking for Kirby, but Williamson clears. This is a crucial period for Arsenal: another goal for Chelsea now, and cup number 15 might begin to look like a pipe dream. 58 min: Bachmann looks positively buoyed by her goal. She floats down the right imperiously, exchanging passes with Kirby and nearly breaking into the Arsenal box. Not quite this time. 56 min: A burst of quality here, though, as Little dribbles down the inside-right channel before slipping a pass inside for Miedema. She’s got time and space, but opts not to hit with her left, checking inside instead. Chapman slides in and blocks the danger. For the first time in the match, Chelsea looked seriously open at the back there. 54 min: Chapman swings one in from the right, forcing Arsenal to concede a corner. The set piece doesn’t lead to much. The game’s got a little scrappy since the goal, with both teams reassessing their positions. A lot of loose passes. 53 min: Chapman and van de Donk get involved in a shoving match out on the Chelsea right. Chapman’s boot looked a bit high, and Mitchell gets involved as well. It’s all something and nothing, and tempers soon cool. 52 min: But Arsenal aren’t taking this lying down. Mead works herself a little space down the inside-right channel, and gets her side’s first shot on target. Low and hard, towards the bottom right. Lindahl saves, but makes a meal of it, forcing Bright to knock the rebound out for a corner. The set piece is easily dealt with by Chelsea, but that’s much better from Arsenal. 50 min: It’s fair to say Chelsea have upped the tempo, then. Kirby and Bachmann have been buzzing relentlessly since the restart. This is a brilliant goal! Ji, deep on the right, slips a ball inside for Bachmann, who one-twos crisply with Kirby and enters the box. Then she pearls an unstoppable rising shot into the top-right corner. What a finish! Van Veenendaal got a fingertip to it, but could do nothing to stop the shot, such was its vicious power. That’s some finish! 47 min: Bachmann slides a pass down the middle of the park, to see if Kirby can beat Mitchell in a foot race. Mitchell wins that one, and she had to because Arsenal were light at the back. And we’re off again! Arsenal get the ball rolling once more. There have been no half-time substitutions. According to Karen Carney, Chelsea’s injured winger, the Blues have been told in no uncertain terms to up the tempo. Let’s see. Half-time scores: Away from Wembley, Everton and Southampton are playing in the men’s Premier League. That game’s goalless at the break too, but those desirous of more detail could do worse than clicking here: The pre-match favourites Chelsea have been the better side. But van Veenendaal hasn’t had too much serious work to do. Both sides will be relatively content, if not deliriously happy. 44 min: Ji has woken up, though. The hero of 2015 sends a rasping shot inches over the bar from 20 yards, having been set up by Bachmann. 43 min: Ji batters the free kick witlessly into the wall. She picks up the rebound, and her second attempt is much better, a curler towards the bottom right. But there’s no pace on the shot, and van Veenendaal is able to smother it easily enough. 42 min: Kirby jolts the game into life with the bolt of electricity it surely needs. She embarks on a George Best-style left-to-right dribble, at great speed. She nearly breaks into the box, but is forced to check and lay off to Ji. Chelsea suddenly appear to be going nowhere, so it’s pretty daft of Janssen to clatter into Ji. Free kick, just to the right of the D, and a booking for the Arsenal midfielder. 40 min: Williamson tries to release Nobbs down the right, but that long pass flies out for a goal kick too. The teams are beginning to cancel each other out. 38 min: Bright, sitting deep on the right, looks to release Kirby down the left with a quarterback rake. Too far. Goal kick. “Is BBC commentator Jonathan Pearce always as bad as this?” wonders Charles Antaki. “This is not so much a description of the game as a series of ruminations about his travel arrangements, the amusing idiosyncrasies of his fellow-commentator, and, occasionally, a meditation on a player’s history touched off by something that has actually happened on the pitch.” He’s just spent a couple of minutes reminiscing about a visit to Wembley for a Schoolboy international during the early 1970s. I quite like meandering jazz pieces like that, but each to their own I guess. 36 min: See 34 min. Arsenal are struggling to hold onto possession and offering next to nothing in attack. Chelsea are hogging the ball ... and offering next to nothing in attack. It’s a very strange way for the game to have suddenly settled, given the entertaining opening exchanges. 34 min: More Chelsea dominance in the middle of the park. Still nothing much doing up front. The game has settled into a pattern of defence versus sort-of-attack. 32 min: Chelsea continue to dominate the midfield. But they’ve yet to make van Veenendaal work. Chapman drives down the left then pulls back for Kirby, who nearly executes a cute one-two with Blundell. If the return pass had been any good, Kirby would have been one on one with the Arsenal keeper. But van Veenendaal remains untested. 30 min: Chelsea knock it around the middle of the park awhile, then burst quickly down the right. Blundell races into space, and floats what momentarily looks like a dangerous cross into the middle, but eventually settles on the roof of the net. 28 min: A brief pause followed by a slight lull, the result of Spence having taken a whack. She’s good to continue. The crowd entertain themselves with a Mexican wave. Hey, if it was good enough for the Azteca locals at the 1986 World Cup, it’s good enough for us. 26 min: Kirby dances down the inside-left channel and smacks goalwards from the edge of the box. It’s another fantastic run, with the Arsenal back line retreating in panic and confusion, but the shot’s straight at van Veenendaal, who snaffles. 25 min: Eriksson hoicks it long. Bright tries to rise at the far post, but the delivery is overcooked. Goal kick. 24 min: Bachmann goes into overdrive down the right. She’s cynically tugged back by Mitchell, who really should be booked. Two hands pulling away at her arm! But the referee stops at a stern talking-to. Lucky Mitchell. But it’s a free kick in a very dangerous position, to the right of the Arsenal box. 22 min: ... and Chelsea finally clear their lines. This is a good response by Arsenal to that period of Chelsea pressure. This looks to be a nicely balanced final: both teams have had their chances to open the scoring. 21 min: ... Arsenal nearly score. Cutting in from the left, Miedema jinks her way past Spence and looks for the top right. The ball’s deflected off Blundell and threatens to fly into the top left. Not quite: another corner. And Chelsea can’t get out. A third corner comes along soon enough ... 20 min: Nobbs races down the right into space. Her cross doesn’t find a team-mate, but Little picks up possession on the other flank, cuts inside, and nearly floats a cross onto Miedema’s head. It’s eyebrowed out for a corner, from which ... 19 min: The first lull of the match. The players have earned it: it’s been a high-octane start. 17 min: This is very open, and there’s a sense that a goal might be along sooner rather than later. It nearly comes here, as Andersson curls a ball into the Arsenal box from the left. Nobody in red deals with it, allowing Kirby to take it down, 12 yards out, a little to the right. Kirby drops a shoulder to shift the ball left, but can’t get a shot away as Arsenal finally close her down. That’s a good chance to bother van Veenendaal spurned. 16 min: A free kick for Arsenal wide on the left. Nobbs floats it diagonally into the mixer. Quinn rises highest at the far post, but can’t keep her header on target. It flies harmlessly over. 14 min: Bright makes a misjudgement under a long pass down the Arsenal left and allows Mead to skitter down the flank. Fortunately for Chelsea, Mjelde comes across to cover and put a stop to Mead’s gallop. 13 min: Mitchell looks much more confident in attack. She powers up the left and drifts inside, but that thin Chelsea blue line is strung across the pitch, and there’s nobody in red offering themselves. No pass on, she’s forced to turn back. But if nothing else, it’s a release from that period of Chelsea pressure. 11 min: Chelsea are beginning to push Arsenal back. Kirby has another run down the left, though she can’t quite make it through the back line. Never mind, she has another go, chasing after a long ball down the same flank. Williamson should get to it first, but Kirby is persistent ... and very fast. She nips in ahead, but can’t quite sort her feet out to shoot, and Williamson recovers to usher her away. 9 min: Ki slips a pass down the inside-right channel for Bachmann, who spins around Mitchell and breaks free into the box. She’s one on one with van Veenendaal, albeit facing a tight angle, and drags her shot across the face of goal and out for a goal kick. What a turn, though! That sent Mitchell spinning. 8 min: The in-form Kirby goes on a Garrinchaesque run down the inside-left channel. She makes it into the Arsenal area but finds herself surrounded by red shirts. She attempts to shoot through the thicket of players but the ball balloons out for a corner, which comes to nothing. The first sight of Kirby in full flight. It’ll give Arsenal pause. 7 min: Miedema gegenpresses Blundell and very nearly exposes Chelsea down the left. The final ball’s again lacking as Chelsea, playing five across the back, regroup quickly enough. 5 min: Spence probes down the Chelsea left a couple of times. Once again, a busy run ends with a cross that flies straight to the opposition. But both teams have come out of the blocks with attacking intent. It’s been a brisk start to the final. 3 min: Mead zips down the Arsenal left with extreme prejudice. She turns Blundell and Bright this way and that, and enters the box, a dexterous and determined dribble. But her cross inside is aimless and hacked clear by Chelsea. And we’re off! Chelsea get the party started. A huge roar as the match gets underway. Chelsea stroke it about the back for a while, then Bright launches it forward. Arsenal return it quickly; Bright knocks it out of play with Miedema and Mead buzzing around. A busy but undramatic start for the Chelsea defender. The teams are out! Arsenal are in their famous red shirts with white sleeves, while Chelsea play in their storied blue. A cracking atmosphere at Wembley as the pre-match pleasantries take place. Plenty of wide smiles as the excitement ratchets up. The heavily pregnant Emma Hayes has asked her assistant Paul Green to lead the team out, while she sits on the bench. Green sports an orange rose, grown in Hayes’ own garden. All of her players were gifted one today, as a gesture of love and solidarity. Arsenal have some nice red ones going on, so everyone’s happy. Time for motivational huddles. “I’ve really become a tremendous fan of women’s football, particularly after reading Carrie Dunn’s fine book The Roar of the Lionesses,” writes Hubert O’Hearn, who can speak for me on this subject. “Anyone who finds the men jaded, a bit spoiled or so forth should read Carrie’s book. All athletes everywhere say that they compete for the love of the game. The women footballers really mean it. Very, very few of their associated men’s clubs (Arsenal and Chelsea being two exceptions) treat their women’s sides at all well. I applaud these players’ devotion, skill and attitude. Let’s hope for a cracking great final!” Yep. And anyone yet to read Carrie’s superb book should get on it immediately, if not sooner. Anyway, we’ll be off in a minute! Arsenal boss Joe Montemurro talks! “Obviously our tradition as cup specialists is there - thanks for the pressure! - but cup finals are cup finals, and it’s on the day. We’ve been part of many fantastic events, and hopefully this is another one. Chelsea are a very good side, with cover and power all over the pitch, and whatever starting XI they put out is very strong. Some of the best players in the world are out there on show, and it’s going to be an amazing event.” Chelsea manager Emma Hayes - expecting twins this month, so she won’t be leading her team out - speaks! “This is what we work hard for, when you’re freezing cold in January and you don’t want to come out training. I’m proud of the players, and equally to think we’re playing in front of a record crowd, which importantly shows the growth of the game. Our side is experienced and accustomed to high-level games on a regular basis, both internationally and at club level. But it counts for nothing in a single game. It’s whoever shows up on the day.” Arsenal have a couple of erstwhile final goalscorers in their ranks too. Jordan Nobbs found the net in their 2013 victory over Bristol Academy, and is the heartbeat of the side today. Danielle Carter scored the winner against Chelsea three years later, though she’s only on the bench this afternoon, with Vivianne Miedema and Beth Mead getting the nod up front. Anyway, here we are 12 months down the line, and Chelsea build their midfield around Katie Chapman, who is making her 11th appearance in an FA Cup final. She’s alongside the South Korean international Ji So-yun, who scored the winner in the 2015 final against Notts County. For those of you who need reminding, here’s what happened this time last year. The 2017 final between Manchester City and Birmingham City was highly memorable - the Citizens became the first club to hold all of English football’s major trophies, the WSL, League Cup and FA Cup, at the same time - if not particularly dramatic. The game was as good as over after 32 minutes, thanks in no small part to the force of nature that is Lucy Bronze. She was outstanding. You can relive how Bronze and Manchester City stormed Wembley here: A 40,000-plus crowd is expected at Wembley this afternoon, while the game is the subject of a live telecast on the British Broadcasting Corporation’s flagship channel, BBC One. This is arguably the highest profile the Women’s FA Cup final has had to date, and the big game has been previewed by our own Louise Taylor: Arsenal: Van Veenendaal, Evans, Williamson, Quinn, Mitchell, Janssen, Van de Donk, Little, Nobbs, Mead, Miedema. Subs: Moorhouse, Samuelsson, McCabe, O’Reilly, Carter. Chelsea: Lindahl, Bright, Mjelde, Eriksson, Blundell, Ji, Chapman, Andersson, Spence, Kirby, Bachmann. Subs: Telford, Thorisdottir, Flaherty, Aluko, Cuthbert. Referee: Lindsey Robinson (Durham). Arsenal are synonymous with the Women’s FA Cup. More so than Southampton, who monopolised the tournament during its Seventies infancy; more so than Doncaster Belles, who took over as stars of the show in the Eighties. The Gunners only won their first FA Cup in 1993, but since then it’s been total domination: to date, they’ve lifted the trophy 14 times. Take a look at the roll of honour! 14: Arsenal 8: Southampton 6: Doncaster Belles 2: Everton, Croydon, Fulham, Millwall 1: Fodens, QPR, St Helens, Lowestoft, Howbury Grange, Friends of Fulham, Norwich, Charlton Athletic, Birmingham City, Chelsea, Manchester City They’re not favourites today, though. Chelsea might have just the one FA Cup to their name - a Ji So-Yun inspired triumph over Notts County in 2015 - but they’re the team of the moment. They’re the winners of last year’s Spring Series; neck and neck with Manchester City at the top of WSL1 at the moment; and knocked out City, last year’s winners, in the semis, Fran Kirby the two-goal hero. As well as Kirby - 22 goals in 31 matches this season! - Chelsea can also call on someone who is fairly synonymous with this competition herself. Their 35-year-old captain Katie Chapman has won this trophy nine times already: once with Millwall (as a 14-year-old), twice with Fulham, another time with Charlton, four times with Arsenal, and finally once with her current club. Ashley Cole and Arsene Wenger, seven-time winners with the men, have nothing on this. Arsenal will counter all this by pointing to ... Vivianne Miedema’s upsetting of Manchester City in the recent League Cup final; the sheer quality of Jordan Nobbs, England’s star midfielder in last year’s Euros; and the small fact of their 2016 final win against Chelsea, Danielle Carter doing the business back then. So this is set up delightfully, not least because it’s a huge London derby. Last year’s final was memorable enough - Manchester City swatting aside Birmingham City, with Keira Walsh, Carli Lloyd and especially Lucy Bronze nothing short of sensational - though drama was in short supply. This one could be more of a nerve-jangler, a fingernail-botherer, an in-the-balance classic. Here’s hoping, anyway. It’s Chelsea and Arsenal! It’s English football’s showpiece! It’s on! Kick off: 5.30pm BST.
13||Jake Livermore’s late winner keeps alive West Brom hopes of staying upA sensational last-gasp escape from relegation remains possible for West Brom thanks to Jake Livermore’s stoppage time winner. If other results go in their favour – they need Swansea and Southampton to draw on Tuesday for a start – then victory at Crystal Palace next Sunday could secure their survival. That outcome seemed utterly implausible when Darren Moore stepped into the vacancy left by the dismissal of Alan Pardew last month but Moore has transformed the team’s fortunes, inspiring a run of three wins and two draws from his five matches at the helm. No wonder the crowd clamoured here for him to be appointed on a permanent basis. As the clock ticked past 90 minutes West Brom were on course to prolong Moore’s unbeaten record but his team knew anything less than a win would lead to demotion on the spot. So there was an explosion of joy all around the Hawthorns when Livermore forced the ball over Spurs’ line from close range following an almighty scramble after a corner by Matt Phillips. All around the ground except in the visiting dugout, that is, as Mauricio Pochettino was left to lament the “lack of ambition” shown by his team throughout a match from which they seemed to expect a comfortable win. No such criticism could be directed at Moore’s side. Spurs, aiming to consolidate their place in the top four and maintain their notional chance of leapfrogging Manchester United into second place, began as if their victory was as inevitable as the hosts’ relegation was supposed to be. They set up camp in West Brom’s half and waited for an opening to present itself, hogged possession but were ponderous. Unable to create early on, Tottenham seemed in need of unwitting assistance from their opponents. But, unlike during most of the campaign, West Brom did not oblige. They defended steadfastly. Not until the 24th minute did Spurs even attempt a shot. It was a good one, Victor Wanyama’s curling effort from 20 yards forcing Ben Foster to tip over the bar. Danny Rose tried something similar one minute later but sent the ball into the stands. Kieran Trippier produced the first really incisive pass of the game, sliding in Harry Kane on the half-hour. Foster rushed off his line and diverted the striker’s shot from eight yards behind for a corner. From the set piece Spurs worked the ball to Christian Eriksen, whose cross from the left found Kane. But the striker could not steer a header on target. West Brom’s rope-a-dope strategy nearly paid off before the break. Chris Brunt’s long free-kick into the box in the 41st minute ran all the way to Jay Rodriguez, who dabbed the ball across the face of goal. Toby Alderweireld headed it out for a corner before any home player could pounce. But three minutes later West Brom almost took the lead from another corner, only for Ahmed Hegazi to nod wide from six yards. Spurs were nearly caught out within moments of the resumption after half-time, as Phillips glided down the right and crossed for Salomón Rondón but the striker missed his kick from close range. West Brom grew bolder as the finale drew closer. “We knew we had to contain them early on and the pendulum started to swing around the 60th minute,” said Moore. “We just had the trust and belief that we would get a goal.” As West Brom applied more pressure Kane became so spooked that he almost slicked a cross into his own net. Hugo Lloris had to make a brilliant save to prevent the England striker from being credited with a goal that he would not have wanted to claim. The one West Brom craved came in stoppage time, Livermore stabbing the ball into the net from inches out after Lloris parried a close-range header by Craig Dawson. When the final whistle went, players who have been booed off many times this season were acclaimed by the Hawthorns crowd. Fans made it clear they want Moore to remain at the helm for next season no matter the league they play in. “There’s been some pride restored,” said Moore. “The feelgood factor is back around the community and club. I feel from the support that there is a real good energy in the club again and that’s all anybody would really want.”
13||Tom Davies strikes late for Everton to dent Southampton hopes of staying upSouthampton were denied a huge step towards Premier League survival when Everton prevented a second successive league victory under Mark Hughes through a last-gasp equaliser from Tom Davies. The visitors must have thought they had done enough to win, with Nathan Redmond even bringing a late save from Jordan Pickford when Southampton had been reduced to 10 men, but when Ryan Bertrand gave the ball away with just seconds remaining Davies crashed in a shot from Idrissa Gueye’s square ball via a deflection off Wesley Hoedt. The only consolation for Southampton is that they still managed to move out of the bottom three and above Swansea, going into the all-important meeting in South Wales on Tuesday. There was also another reprieve for West Brom, who would have been relegated by a Southampton victory, but little respite for Sam Allardyce. Though Everton have been safe for some time their manager’s position is looking increasingly precarious. Allardyce was hoping to use this game to leave Everton fans feeling positive over the summer, and it is doubtful whether Davies’s late rescue act will have quite that effect. Hughes was furious at the end because Jon Moss awarded a free-kick against Redmond for an offence no one else had seen, then allowed Everton to take it from the wrong place. Not what you need when you are shorthanded and trying to cling on for dear life. “Jon Moss was 30 yards behind the play, as he usually is,” the Southampton manager said. “He gave a free-kick that shouldn’t have been. At least we took something from the game. Everton had to change their shape to match us and we were still better at it than they were. We got everything right in the game until the final few moments, and we didn’t get any help from the officials.” Davies showed willing in the opening minutes with a shot from the edge of the area that was not too far off the target, though Everton failed to keep up anything like the same urgency. Cenk Tosun headed over the bar with a difficult chance from a Séamus Coleman cross but that was about it for home attempts on goal in the first half and Allardyce was soon in his technical area gesturing furiously for his side to get men further forward. Southampton were the first side to bring a save from a goalkeeper, and a very good one it was too from Pickford, whose reactions did not let him down when Charlie Austin sent in a volley on target with little warning after the ball came his way off Michael Keane. By the half-hour mark Southampton were looking the more likely to make a breakthrough and Everton were glad Phil Jagielka was in the right position to make a timely interception when the ball came through to Oriol Romeu in front of goal. To say the game was low on incident and excitement would be a considerable understatement. The home side departed to boos at half-time, though that has become par for the course in recent weeks. Even when Everton won at Huddersfield last week there was still dissatisfaction expressed at the style of football being played under Allardyce. Or perhaps just the continued presence of Allardyce. The school of science, it is being said by some unhappy supporters, is presently in special measures. Allardyce is impervious to that sort of background noise, of course, and as a half-time flourish to mark the end of his first season at Goodison he brought on Ramiro Funes Mori for Yannick Bolasie and switched to a back three. He does not exactly court popularity, though something needed to change and after an anonymous first half the winger could hardly complain. Southampton also made a change, Redmond replacing the ineffective Mario Lemina, and 10 minutes after the restart it was Hughes looking smug on the sideline. Dusan Tadic and Cédric Soares found space on the Everton left behind the now advanced Leighton Baines – always the drawback with wing-backs – and from the latter’s precise cross Redmond arrived in the area to beat Pickford with a firm downward header. Cue joy in the small corner of the Bullens Road stand that was red and white and more boos from the blue majority. The visitors were forced to see out the last five minutes with 10 men after Maya Yoshida picked up a second yellow for a foul on Oumar Niasse. Baines brought a brilliant fingertip save from Alex McCarthy with a stoppage-time free-kick but time was running out when Bertrand made his mistake and invited Everton to claim a point they barely merited. That may sound harsh but Allardyce himself admitted it. “We nicked a point we didn’t deserve,” the Everton manager said. “It’s disappointing but we have made overall progress.”
13||Ramona Bachmann at the double as Chelsea seal FA Cup win over ArsenalEmma Hayes hailed the in-form striker Fran Kirby and said her Chelsea side gave “some dominant performance” in their second FA Cup win. The manager, due to give birth to twins this month, said her side’s superiority meant it was the “most relaxed I’ve felt in a final in my entire career” and joked it was a “bonus” given her condition. A Ramona Bachmann double and a goal from Kirby gave Chelsea their first silverware of the season and exorcised the ghosts of two years ago. This was a rematch of the 2016 final, for which Hayes said the Blues “didn’t turn up”, when a curling Danielle Carter strike won Arsenal the trophy. This time Chelsea did show up and a goal from Vivianne Miedema to reduce the deficit to 2-1 after Bachmann’s double was not enough to turn the game for Arsenal. Joe Montemurro was full of praise for the forward line his team were up against. “We’re obviously disappointed but they’re a powerful team,” the Arsenal manager said. “There were a couple of structural things we need to work on but I don’t want to take away from them and what they are able to do to teams with the power they have up front.” The opening chances fell to the Gunners. Three minutes in Beth Mead was able to break free on the left but her teasing ball into the box was poked clear before it could reach a red shirt. Seconds later, Jordan Nobbs played an almost identical ball in, this time from the right, but Maren Mjelde got herself in front of a waiting Miedema. Both sides were nursing hangovers but neither seemed to be letting that get to them. Arsenal had suffered their first defeat in 14 games when they crumbled at Birmingham last Sunday – Ellen White’s hat-trick breaking a back line that had conceded only five goals since Montemurro took charge in October. Meanwhile Chelsea, still unbeaten in the league but having slipped behind Manchester City on goal difference, missed out on a first Champions League final after a 5-1 aggregate loss to Wolfsburg. The Blues’ first chances came through Kirby, the Professional Footballers’ Association and Football Writers’ Association player of the year. Twice in quick succession the England striker picked up the ball on the left and danced past three tight Arsenal players but her square passes were crowded out. Shortly after that Bachmann and Ji So-yun played a one-two on the edge of the box, the Swiss forward spinning beautifully but shooting wide of the far post. The chances did not stop for the Gunners, though, and the best of the half came as a delightful ball over the top put Mead in on goal with just Hedvig Lindahl to beat but a sprinting Mjelde chased her down before she could get a shot away. As the clock ticked towards half-time Chelsea began to ramp up the pressure and Ji and Bachmann continued to combine well on the right. Chelsea began the second period as they ended the first and it did not take long for them to break the deadlock. Bachmann and Ji linked up again, this time getting Kirby involved, who fed the ball back to Bachmann and the forward blasted high into Van Veenendaal’s net. Arsenal were undeterred by falling behind, Lindahl was forced to palm the ball away from Mead. Five minutes later the Gunners captain, Kim Little, who has won the cup three times with her club, played a pinpoint pass to Miedema, who perhaps should have shot first time but turned and gave the Blues time to rush back. The Gunners’ wastefulness in front of goal was then punished by Bachmann again. Her shot from the right looped in off the 21-year-old defender Leah Williamson to extend Chelsea’s lead. From then the game began to slow, Chelsea happy to sit back and Arsenal searching for a way to break through a defence that had not conceded in the competition. But the pressure eventually paid off, Mead’s cross into the box finding Miedema and this time the Euro 2017 winner did not wait, sweeping the ball past Lindahl to halve the deficit. But just three minutes later Kirby picked up the ball on the edge of the Arsenal area, stepped past Louise Quinn and fired home to deal a hammer-blow to the Gunners. It was her sixth FA Cup goal this season and it keeps Chelsea in the hunt for the double.
13||Mark Noble fires West Ham to win at Leicester and safetyThe chance to revel in another club’s misery must have felt unusual for West Ham. They have endured a traumatic season but this was a rare moment of gaiety. David Moyes strode on to the pitch to embrace his players at the end and even Andy Carroll, banished from training earlier in the week, could be seen lapping up the acclaim from the jubilant away fans. West Ham had delivered a passable impression of unity just when a collapse looked possible with Mark Noble’s spectacular effort in the second half securing the win that ensures their survival and all the discontent belonged to Leicester instead. The King Power Stadium was empty for the home team’s lap of appreciation, almost two years to the day since Leicester lifted the Premier League trophy, and it is impossible not to fear for Claude Puel’s job prospects. Leicester’s apathy strengthened the theory that they have stopped playing for Claude Puel. The Frenchman has overseen a run of four wins in 19 games and was subjected to mutinous chants from the home fans, who amused themselves with ironic cheers when Christian Fuchs roused Adrián, the visiting goalkeeper, with a shot from long range in the 86th minute. The harsh truth is that West Ham did not have to be spectacular to dominate, even if Moyes was delighted with his side’s response to last Sunday’s chastening defeat to Manchester City. “I’m really pleased with the performance,” West Ham’s manager said. “It was really good, especially in the first half. More importantly the result was what mattered. The sooner we got a win, the better. We are capable of that. What I’m trying to get is for us to be capable every week.” With Puel teetering on the brink, West Ham did not dare pass up the opportunity to move five points clear of the bottom three and, when Southampton conceded a late equaliser at Everton, the Hammers’ survival was confirmed. Moyes had complained before the game that a culture of leaks was making his job harder, but this was a time for togetherness and it soon became apparent that the visitors had nothing to fear from their unhappy opponents. Leicester, missing nine players, struggled to build any positive intent. They relinquished possession with alarming frequency, leaving Jamie Vardy isolated in attack, and they were fortunate when Manuel Lanzini failed to punish a poor clearance from Ben Hamer in the fifth minute. Hamer would soon be forced to race from his line to deny Marko Arnautovic, whose next contribution was to get in the way of Lanzini’s shot, and Leicester’s lethargy would have shamed a hungover teenager. Puel insisted that he is looking forward to next season but his bosses might have other ideas. West Ham had control in midfield and, despite starting without an orthodox striker again, the measure of Leicester’s defence. Lanzini and João Mário were full of mischief in their floating roles behind Arnautovic, who settled for creating the opening goal a minute after rattling the bar with a fierce effort. Arthur Masuaku, an effervescent presence on the left after returning to the starting lineup, swung a deep cross to the far post in the 34th minute and Arnautovic levered himself into position, making space with the slightest of pushes on Fuchs, and pulled the ball back for Mário to finish from close range. Leicester played with greater intensity at the start of the second half and were enraged when Aaron Cresswell escaped with a booking after stopping Vardy with an intentional handball. Yet they failed to stretch one of the league’s leakiest defences and West Ham should have profited on the break, only for Arnautovic to dither with Lanzini screaming for a pass. Sensing edginess, Puel replaced Hamza Choudhury and Fousseni Diabaté with Demarai Gray and Kelechi Iheanacho in the 61st minute and Leicester almost equalised when Harry Maguire whistled a shot over from 18 yards. Yet Arnautovic would soon be placing his hands on his head in disbelief as he watched Noble’s vicious volley from 25 yards swerve to Hamer’s right and nestle in the bottom corner. It was a stunning goal from the midfielder, who showed perfect technique when he met a loose clearance with his right foot, and an audacious way for West Ham to seal a precious victory.
3||Don’t laugh, but Scottish football really is on the rise after years in the doldrumsTo say that football supporters in Scotland are intrinsically pessimistic about the country’s football prospects is not entirely accurate – we have simply become fearful of optimism. In the 20 years that have elapsed since Scotland last qualified for a major international championship, we have grabbed at any small signals that might indicate we were about to reach the Promised Land. Perhaps we are being punished for making graven images of football and its princes and for allowing it to play a disproportionately important role in our existences. Thus, I’m fearful of the sense of hope that perhaps our two decades of wandering in the desert might be about to end. In other nations that embrace this capricious game, hope is seen as a positive force, something that sustains you during times of adversity. In Scotland, we have come to despise it because it always ends in disappointment. And yet… In Rome last week, we witnessed Andrew Robertson, a 24-year-old Glaswegian full-back play a vital role for Liverpool in Rome as they reached the final of the Champions League for the first time since 2007. On 26 May in Kiev, he will become the first Scot to play in one of the biggest sporting events on the planet since Paul Lambert helped Borussia Dortmund to a 3-1 win against Juventus in Munich in 1997. The year after Lambert’s feat, Scotland reached the World Cup finals in France. Could Robertson’s displays 21 years later presage our return from the international wilderness? Or is this merely another wretched symptom of the madness that has taken a hold of our souls? There have been other signs and wonders. One has been the emergence in the Manchester United midfield of Scott McTominay, who qualifies to play for Scotland by dint of having a Scottish father. This 21-year-old isn’t one of those Anglo-Scots who has grasped at the chance of international football under a flag of convenience in the knowledge that he’ll never play for England. McTominay is a thoroughbred who possesses the talents to become a future English international. Yet he chose Scotland because that’s what his heart was telling him. Is this another sign? In Scottish club football, something else has been happening that may contain the seeds of optimism. Celtic, which won the Scottish title by defeating Rangers 5-0, had seven Scots on the park at the end of the game. Three others were either injured or on the substitutes’ bench. This is generally regarded as the best Celtic team since the era of the Lisbon Lions in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The tribulations and self-inflicted wounds that led to the liquidation of Rangers in 2012 still beset this massive club. Their capitulation to Celtic last week followed a 4-0 defeat to them in the Scottish Cup two weeks earlier. Rangers have never been weaker. Steven Gerrard, whose only experience of coaching has been a few months in charge of Liverpool’s under-18s, is expected to halt Rangers’ second slide into the abyss. He will need upwards of £20m even to be in the same room as Celtic, a sum that Rangers cannot produce under their own steam. The downfall of Rangers has led many Scottish football pundits to express their dismay at the adverse effect this has had on the wider game. In the history of Scottish football, the statement “Scotland needs a strong Rangers” has been deployed as often as “hoof the ball up the park”. This is partly true, but not in the way its acolytes intend. Certainly, a strong Rangers is better than a weak one, in the same way that a strong Partick Thistle is better than a weak one. However, to suggest that Scottish football has been weakened by Rangers’ troubles is questionable. In the six seasons since Rangers went into liquidation, Aberdeen, Hibs, Hearts, St Mirren, Ross County, St Johnstone and Inverness Caledonian Thistle have all lifted silverware. Several of those clubs have either improved their stadiums or are in the process of doing so. They have used their success wisely by resisting the urge to take shortcuts to unsustainable success. In the Scottish Premiership, Aberdeen, Hibs, Motherwell and Kilmarnock have managed to assemble strong teams under young and modern managers and with a scattering of talented young Scots. Hibs were the first British club to compete in the European Cup in 1955-56 and progressed to the semi-finals. The current side, under the tutelage of Neil Lennon, is the best that Edinburgh has seen for almost 50 years. The week before Celtic annihilated Rangers they were cleanly beaten by a Hibs side in which the best players were all young Scots. They were fast, fit, skilful and better than Celtic. The worst nightmare for Rangers supporters is Celtic achieving a landmark 10 successive league titles, thus eclipsing the current record of nine jointly held by each. Nor would this say much that is positive about Scottish football’s competitiveness (though Bayern Munich are well on the way to making it 10 Bundesligas in a row). If the Hibs board can resist the urge of previous administrations and attempt to hang on to its brightest and best for another season or two, then Neil Lennon may become the unlikely slayer of Rangers fans’ scariest demons. Steven Gerrard may yet become the man to steer Rangers out of the doldrums but Lennon, who always flourishes in adversity, has everything they lack. • Kevin McKenna is an Observer columnist
3||Behind the literary lustre lie tales of power, secrecy and sexual abuseIt’s not a whodunnit, #MeToo – the most significant metric is not the severity of the shock each fresh revelation provokes. Whether or not you are aghast with surprise or invoke instinct or esoteric knowledge to declare that you suspected something all along is insignificant. Its only use is to help us calibrate how far entrenched are the social mechanisms that protect men from the consequences of their actions and deny women the support and care they need having suffered those actions. In short, it is not about you. You do not get points for having predicted the villain and your retroactive piecing together of the plot has no place here and borders on the ghoulish. The temporary suspension of the Nobel prize in literature while the Academy gets to grips with an abuse scandal is not some high-culture Scandi-drama, in which lurid violence is enacted against a backdrop of stylish interiors and scudding skies. The emergence of allegations of sexual aggression and misogyny against the writer Junot Díaz is not American Bitch, the episode of Girls in which Lena Dunham’s Hannah Horvath meets a manipulative male writer and finds herself both reluctantly fascinated and thoroughly repulsed. No. These stories are about real people who may have endured real harm at the hands of those more powerful than them and who have felt, often for many years, unable to voice those experiences. Not uncommonly, the price of their silence has extended beyond “pure” emotional damage to a clear impact on their professional, financial and creative lives; that price has been paid while watching their oppressor appear to flourish and to receive the world’s approbation. But, of course, these narratives are about you and about all of us. And when they involve those who tell stories for a living, they are also unavoidably about the weight that we accord different words, from different mouths. In the literary world, we have known since God was a lad that a woman writing about relationships, parenthood and the domestic sphere was a lady novelist more likely to provide consolation than controversy, while her male counterpart was creating a searing portrait of the power dynamics of intimacy. When Proust writes about a biscuit, a whole world of time, memory and mortality opens up and alters perception; when a woman does the same, a magazine rings her to ask for the recipe. (No shade on Proust, who is the absolute boy. But you know it’s true.) In fictional terms, the Nobel fiasco would not pass the verisimilitude test. A secretive organisation, whose inner workings may not be known but are yet powerful enough to transform anointed writers’ careers; a man accused of long-term sexual abuse, some of which is alleged to have occurred in venues part-funded by that same organisation; a wife – for the accused is not a judge of the literature prize, but his wife is – compelled to take responsibility for her husband’s actions. The result: a prize leaking authority by the minute, in a world where prizes are king. Leaving aside whether it is right or not to expel Katarina Frostenson from the Swedish Academy, one thing is striking: the members of Nobel committees are unchanging and, indeed, are not permitted to resign. It is, literally, a job for life. How, then, can change – of representation, of taste, of personality – ever come to pass? And why do we venerate the decisions of this immutable group of people whom we do not know. For veneration is the problem. Once we get beyond the hell of abusers behaving with impunity, of the networks that may enable and guard them, of the disbelieved women and of the unspeakable insanity of the abuse hierarchy – the immediate recourse to the exhausting, cyclical conversations that go “a patted knee is not verbal insult is not a sleazy gesture is not a rape” – then we come back to the issue of worship. Díaz, it has been asserted over the last couple of days, was the darling of the New Yorker, the trailblazer for Latinx writers, the creator of works that readers hold to their hearts. When, last month, he wrote of being raped at the age of eight and when he painstakingly elaborated on its after-effects – depression, thoughts of suicide, impotence – his openness and courage were widely hailed. Now it is being described as a pre-emptive bid for leniency and sympathy as the day of reckoning approached. But his experience exists either way. As people now focus on the way female characters are treated in Díaz’s fiction – tricky, because there is a strong argument for separating novels from their authors, but Díaz has spoken frequently about the autobiographical nature of his writing – a line from the essay comes to mind. It’s surprising, Díaz wrote, how easy it is “to rewrite the truth away”. Fiction, no matter how much it corresponds to reality, and no matter its author’s intent, is different, because it is created by and in language. There was an even more telling moment and it came when Díaz wrote of his “wine-dark sea of pain”. To deploy Homer is not a neutral act, even if it is unwitting. It is to summon a whole literary heritage and situate yourself in it, to make yourself part of the epic. If you have loved The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, you cannot unlove it. The art that affected us is in us: it is not a surplus or battered table we can leave out in the rain. What we have now to do is discuss how we separate reality from reputation; how we find a way to approach the impossibly painful story of an apparent victim turned alleged oppressor; how we centre the experiences of victims. And how we accept that age-old story: that Great Expectations are not always satisfied. • Alex Clark is an Observer columnist
8||Russia's Alexei Navalny arrested as 1,600 detained nationwideRussia’s opposition leader, Alexei Navalny, was one of about 1,600 of people detained by police during nationwide protests before Vladimir Putin’s inauguration for a fourth presidential term. Navalny, 41, was arrested by police shortly after joining thousands of protesters at Moscow’s Pushkin Square, a short distance from the Kremlin. Officers carried the government critic from the landmark square by his arms and legs as he struggled and angry opposition supporters jeered and shouted. A police helicopter circled low, almost drowning out chants of “Putin is a thief! and “Down with the tsar!” After the arrest, police said Navalny was arrested for disobeying police, an offence punishable by up to 15 days behind bars. He spent two months in prison last year on protest-related charges. Navalny had called for the protests on Saturday prior to Putin’s inauguration on 7 May, a ceremony to mark the start of a new six-year term of office that will keep the former KGB officer in power until 2024. “Putin is not our tsar,” Navalny said in an online video before the rallies. “He intends to manage Russia as his own personal property in the interests of his allies, his family, and a narrow ruling group that has seized power.” Police in Moscow appeared to be taken by surprise when hundreds of protesters surged from Pushkin Square on to Strastnoi Bulvar, a key road that leads to Tverskaya, the Russian capital’s main thoroughfare. Traffic police diverted vehicles before riot police, some lashing out with batons, made repeated attempts to try and clear the road. There were isolated clashes as some protesters attempted to hold their ground. Almost 600 people were taken into custody in Moscow, according to OVD.info, a rights organisation that monitors police detentions. One man wearing a red robe and a crown, an apparent mocking reference to “Tsar Putin”, was among those dragged from the crowd by riot police on one of the hottest days of the year so far in Moscow. “I spent 18 years of my life living under the rule of [Leonid] Brezhnev, and I’ve already spent 18 living under Putin,” said Alexander, 63, an opposition supporter in Moscow. “Two terms was enough. He has no right to rule for so long. He’s never won a genuine election.” Putin, who has now ruled Russia for longer than anyone since Joseph Stalin, the Soviet dictator, took 76% of the vote at presidential elections in March that some international observers and opposition figures said were marred by vote fraud and intimidation. Navalny was barred from standing over a fraud conviction that he says was trumped up to prevent him from challenging Putin at the ballot box. Russian authorities have also twice refused to allow the Kremlin critic to register a political party that could field candidates at parliamentary elections. Moscow’s protest was the biggest in the Russian capital since last year, when opposition supporters repeatedly took to the streets in large numbers over allegations of massive corruption against Dmitry Medvedev, the prime minister. Protesters also gathered on Saturday in scores of other towns and cities across Russia, including St Petersburg, where over 150 people were detained. About 160 people were also detained in Chelyabinsk, in central Russia, and 75 in Yakutsk, the capital of a diamond-mining region in north-east Russia. Many of those taken into custody were minors, reports said. Some opposition activists were reportedly beaten by police. Police were assisted in Moscow by hundreds of members of the pro-Kremlin Molodaya Gvardia youth movement, reports said. Nationalists and people who claimed to be Cossacks also confronted protesters in the Russian capital. Some attacked protesters with leather whips, OVD.info reported. “I’m here to protect my country from those people who want to stage a Maidan,” said Alexei, a pro-government activist, referring to the violent protests that toppled Ukraine’s pro-Moscow president in 2014. Denis Krivosheev, Amnesty International’s deputy director for eastern Europe and central Asia, said: “The forceful dispersal of today’s opposition demonstrations is outrageous. The Russian authorities once again refused to authorise protest rallies, and then used this ban to crackdown on those gathered in Moscow and elsewhere. “But what is worse is the total police inaction, which allowed the beating of protesters by unknown men in Moscow. On what grounds people in ‘Cossack’ uniforms were allowed to use force remains a question.” Although demonstrations will have made unpleasant viewing for Putin just two days before his inauguration and six weeks before the World Cup kicks off in Moscow, the protests were far from the scale and intensity of the 2014 revolt in neighbouring Ukraine or the massive demonstrations that forced Armenia’s prime minister, Serzh Sargsyan, from office last month. The protests were also far smaller than the rally that took place in central Moscow before Putin’s inauguration for a third term in May 2012. That was attended by tens of thousands of people and ended with violent clashes between riot police and protesters. Almost 500 people were arrested and it signalled the end of the Russian opposition’s anti-Putin coalition. “They ruined my big day. Now I’m going to ruin their lives,” Putin reportedly said after the 2012 protest, according to opposition figures citing Kremlin insiders. Saturday’s opposition protests proved once again that Navalny has the ability to bring relatively large numbers of people on to the streets, but they also underlined that he has not experienced a groundswell of popular support that makes him a serious threat to Putin’s long-term grip on power. His supporters say that is partly because he is banned from state television, which carries out regular smear campaigns against Kremlin critics. Navalny has been accused by national television of working with the United States and Britain to bring down Putin, a claim that he has laughed off.
14||Diane Abbott joins Windrush protest march on WhitehallMembers of the Windrush generation, their families and supporters have been joined by the shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, at a rally outside Downing Street. The demonstration on Whitehall, which called for the end of the “hostile environment” deportation policy, was organised by campaign group Stand Up to Racism. Demonstrators, including women who spent months detained in Yarl’s Wood immigration removal centre, held placards that said “Solidarity with the Windrush generation” as some chanted that Theresa May should be deported. Demonstrations were also held in Birmingham and Coventry city centres. In London, Abbott pointed out that she was the first person to call for former home secretary Amber Rudd’s resignation. But she told the crowd of around 150 people: “When it comes to the Windrush scandal, all roads lead back to Theresa May.” Abbott said it was the prime minister who brought in the hostile environment policy. Asked if she thought the government was doing enough to rectify the injustices done, she said: “We will judge them by what they actually do.” Among the demonstrators was Weyman Bennett, 52, from Tottenham in North London, whose family travelled from Jamaica to Britain between 1958 and 1966. His mother came to work in the NHS and his father served in the British army. Bennett said he believed the Windrush generation had been “betrayed”: “Amber Rudd took the blame, but I believe that Theresa May is responsible for it, and she should go. I honestly think that she’s responsible for the inhuman treatment of people. “I’m talking about grandmothers kissing goodbye to their children,” he said. “I hope that Theresa May is held accountable for what she did, because the people’s voices have to be heard.” At the rally in Birmingham, people could be heard shouting, “England is our home” and, “Who built these streets? Our parents did.” Desmond Jaddoo, who organised the event, told Birmingham Live: “Families are still being affected by this, and a more strategic and extensive plan of action is needed from the government in order to address the major inequality and injustice this has created.” “In a year when we will be celebrating 70 years since the Windrush came to the UK, with British citizens who were invited to this country, to help rebuild Britain into what it is today, this is a slap in the face for them,” he said. He added that this is “not how things should be in 2018 Britain”.
0||Dazzling Danny Cipriani steers Wasps past Newcastle into third placeQuite where Danny Cipriani will be playing his rugby next season remains unclear but this was the latest glimpse of his rare talents as he prepares for the next chapter of his career. The enigmatic fly-half, who is leaving Wasps at the end of the campaign and is expected to move to France to join Stade Français or Racing 92, orchestrated a victory that secured third place for Dai Young’s team. A trip to Saracens in the play-off semi-finals now awaits on 19 May, while Newcastle must travel to the leaders and defending champions, Exeter, on the same day. Cipriani departed early in the second half with a minor ankle knock, although it will not curtail his involvement against Saracens, and by then it was job done. The 30-year-old took centre stage during a one-sided first half, laying on a try for the England wing Elliot Daly with a delightful long pass before showing impressive strength to touch down himself on the stroke of half-time. Three minutes after the interval Cipriani’s intelligent kick sent Josh Bassett over in the right corner before Newcastle roused themselves in a gallant second-half fightback, which harvested three tries in nine minutes during the final quarter. There will be a time to judge properly how good these sides actually are but it was not at a sun-kissed Kingston Park, which housed its second capacity crowd of the season. That test will come in the play-offs and Dai Young, not for the first time this season, could not hide his frustration after Wasps switched off when they appeared to be coasting to victory. “That has been our achilles heel and pretty much the story of our season since Christmas,” said Young. “I’ve just told the players that we aren’t going to win at Sarries with a 60-minute performance. It’s as simple as that.” Newcastle have breathed passion and romance into the Premiership this season and will recall key men such as Toby Flood, Vereniki Goneva and Sinoti Sinoti for the trip to Sandy Park, a ground where they have known only defeat. “We’ll learn from today and we’ve got almost two weeks to come up with a game plan to face Exeter,” said the director of rugby, Dean Richards. “We know we’re capable of winning away from home and going there doesn’t faze us. The season hasn’t finished,” he added. Wasps’ hooker, Tom Cruse, charged down Josh Matavesi’s kick to put the visitors in front and Cipriani sent Daly strolling over before he added a third himself on the stroke of half-time. Then came Cipriani’s assist for Bassett before he succumbed to injury – only for his replacement and former Newcastle favourite Jimmy Gopperth to finish off a fine break down the right flank for a fifth Wasps try. Yet Richards has fashioned a side with guts and Matavesi showed the Wasps defence a clean pair of heels to race clear down the left before the wing Zach Kibirige and lock Evan Olmstead added further home scores. The visiting flanker Thomas Young was sin-binned before Willie le Roux scarpered clear from distance for a sixth Wasps try after Gopperth set him free. For both these sides greater challenges lie ahead.
0||County cricket: Essex v Yorkshire, Lancashire v Somerset and more – as it happenedDivision One Surrey 434 v Worcestershire 135-1; Worcs trail by 299 Notts 302 &amp; 136-0, Hampshire 223; Notts lead by 215 Lancashire 217-2, Somerset 429; Lancs trail by 212 Essex 142 &amp; 97-4, Yorkshire 50, 329; Yorkshire lead by 141 Division Two Sussex 323, Middlesex 230 &amp; 64-2; Middlesex trail by 29 Glamorgan 94 &amp; 273-7, Kent 174; Glamorgan lead by 193 Durham 142-7, Leicestershire 440; Durham trail by 298 I think I used the phrase ‘the pendulum swings’ earlier in the day. Well, it’s a case of copy and paste. Yorkshire have wickets three and four courtesy of the evergreen Steve Patterson, who is playing his first match of the season following a broken finger. Patterson uprooted Nick Browne’s middle stump and had Ravi Bopara caught at backward point. Essex are 55 for four with plenty of work to do in pursuit of 238. We still have 15 overs to bowl tonight. Yorkshire are back in business. Steve Patterson has just struck twice in the 10th over, bowling Alastair Cook for 26 and Tom Westley for a duck - his second of the game and, like Aiden Markram at Durham, his third on the trot after one at Hampshire last week and here in the first innings. Essex are 34-2 in the 11th now. Durham, meanwhile, are 59-6 against Leicestershire at the Riverside in reply to 440. Plays and misses, yes, but it’s been a pretty steady start for Essex as they pursue 238 to win their second match of the season. They have advanced to 27 for 0 after seven overs of 32 to be bowled tonight, with Alastair Cook leading the way unbeaten on 20. Much like Joe Root, who also posted a duck in the first innings, he has looked comfortable. Hang on, as I type, there is a dropped catch at third slip. Jack Leaning at third slip off Ben Coad. Sharp catch at around neck high, but it should have been taken. Cook has a life. Aiden Markram: 0, 0 and 0 in his first three innings for Durham. He has just been bowled by Leicestershire’s Ben Raine to leave them at 10 for 3 in reply to the visitors’ 440. Essex need 238 to win having bowled Yorkshire out for 329 after they had been 276 for 3. Tea here. Three more wickets for Essex and two for Jamie Porter, who trapped Tim Bresnan lbw with one that kept low and has just bowled Steve Patterson. Yorkshire, at 305 for 9, lead by 213 with Jack Leaning and Ben Coad together as we approach tea. Some fall from 276 for 3. A fine effort from Glamorgan at Cardiff. They are 155-2 second time around having been bowled out for 94 and conceded an 80-run lead with it. Jack Murphy’s career best 53 not out is helping them along. The pendulum swings again. Yorkshire have lost three wickets for 14 runs, with Harry Brook and Gary Ballance joining Joe Root back in the hutch. Brook miscued Simon Harmer’s off-spin to long-on for 124 before Ballance was bowled as he played down the wrong line to Ravi Bopara for three, leaving Yorkshire at 290 for 6. They lead by 198. At the Oval, Rory Burns fell seven short of a double ton, with Surrey now 423-9 against Worcestershire. Joe Root has gone for 35, bowled by Ravi Bopara off the inside edge as he attempted to drive through the covers. Bopara celebrated his 33rd birthday yesterday and is playing his 200th first-class match. He ended an 86-run stand with Harry Brook, who is unbeaten on 118. Yorkshire are 281 for 4, leading by 189. Gary Ballance has come to the crease. Much like the morning, it has been a quiet start to the afternoon, with Yorkshire adding only the five runs in a couple of overs. They have moved to 265-3, a lead of 173. It’s amazing how this game has turned around. Essex hardly look like taking a wicket at the moment. Yorkshire have reached lunch at 260-3, leading by 168 with Harry Brook unbeaten on 108 and Joe Root looking nicely set on 25. Elsewhere, leaders Somerset have been bowled out for 429, with Lancashire having just started their first innings. Matt Parkinson chipped in with three late wickets for the hosts, who are opening the batting with Keaton Jennings and Alex Davies following the decision to drop Haseeb Hameed. Nottinghamshire are ahead against Hampshire at Trent Bridge, with the visitors losing Hashim Amla to an uncharacteristic heave this morning for 69. They are 154-6 replying to 302. Surrey still going strong at the Oval against Worcestershire at 377-6. Rory Burns is 182 not out. In Division Two, Derbyshire are already two down second time around against Warwickshire at 34-2 and trail by 87. In similar fashion to Surrey against Worcester, Leicestershire are causing Durham grief at the Riverside at 388-7. They look two cracking games at Cardiff and Hove. Glamorgan are 74-1 in their second innings against Kent and trail by just six, while Sussex are 154-6 in reply to Middlesex’s 230. Harry Finch is unbeaten on 67. Some lunchtime news to digest, from Ali Martin: Harry Brook has reached his maiden first-class century off 129 balls as Yorkshire turn the screw at Chelmsford. They are currently 255-3, leading by 163. Maybe a sign of things to come that his partner at the crease is Joe Root. I wouldn’t mind betting that they bat together a lot for England across the years. Warwickshire have been bowled out for 439 by Derbyshire at Edgbaston, losing four morning wickets, including Matt Lamb for 79 and short of a maiden first-class century. South African quick Duanne Olivier finished with four wickets, three this morning. The Bears’ lead is 121, so Derbyshire are not completely out of that one just yet. Here at Chelmsford, Joe Root is up and running following his first-innings golden duck. He punched a boundary through the covers off Sam Cook and has moved to 14, with the Yorkshire score at 211-3, a lead of 119. I would be worried if I was Essex, although batting has looked considerably easier since tea time yesterday. Joe Root is in following the departure of Che Pujara, who isn’t half battling at the moment. Pujara was bowled by Peter Siddle for 41 having not offered a stroke. And it wasn’t just clipping off-stump either. Root survived a sizeable caught behind shout from Siddle before getting off the mark with his seventh ball. He is currently unbeaten on four, with Yorkshire 197-3 and leading by 95. Harry Brook has moved to 70. It all seems to be coming together for Tom Abell, the Somerset captain, who has helped his side claim a fourth batting point at Old Trafford this morning with an unbeaten half-century, backing up the one he scored in victory over Yorkshire last week. Abell’s form with the bat forced him to drop himself briefly last season, but he has recovered impressively. Somerset are 358 for 6, with Abell unbeaten on 68. Kent have been bowled out at Cardiff for 174, taking a lead of 80 into the second innings. It has been a quiet start to day at Chelmsford as Yorkshire steadily advance to 177 for 2, a lead of 85. I reckon we may have already had three, maybe four, wickets by this time yesterday. Che Pujara has driven Jamie Porter down the ground for four and has 35. Peter Siddle had a big caught behind shout against the Indian in the first over turned down. Good morning from a sunny Chelmsford. I have to say I’m still trying to get my head around yesterday’s events. For two sessions, it was carnage as batsmen floundered amid a series of loose shots and bowlers prospered by just hitting an area to coin a players’ cliche. Then, after tea, Jonny Bairstow and Harry Brook both played aggressively to change the momentum of the contest and swing it in Yorkshire’s favour. Bairstow hit 50 and Brook 57 unbeaten. The decision to open with Bairstow second time around could be the game changer when all is said and done, and he played in typically combative fashion, hitting Sam Cook superbly over long-off for six. Brook, the current England under 19s captain, then attacked the spin of Simon Harmer - playing spin is a particularly strength of his - on the way to his maiden first-team fifty. Yorkshire will begin day two on 161/2 in their second innings, leading by 69 with India overseas batsman Che Pujara on 22 alongside Brook. Elsewhere in Division One, leaders Somerset hold the advantage at Old Trafford thanks to centuries from George Bartlett and Marcus Trescothick, the latter who suffered a broken metatarsal and faces a stretch on the sidelines. They will resume on 321/5. At Trent Bridge, Hampshire are 70/3 in reply to Notts’ 302, with Stuart Broad having taken two early wickets. Hashim Amla is unbeaten on 27 against his former county. At the Oval, Rory ‘how is he not in England contention?’ Burns will resume on 137 with Surrey at 278/4 against Worcestershire. In Division Two, they’re into day three at Edgbaston, where Warwickshire have a firm grip on their clash with Derbyshire - 375/6 in reply to 318. Will Rhodes, Chris Wright, Jonathan Trott and Matt Lamb have all posted fifties. Lamb is 79 not out and targeting a maiden career hundred this morning. Leicestershire have started positively against Durham at the Riverside, reaching close on day one at 301/4, with fifties for Carberry, Horton and Cosgrove. It was an opening day not too dissimilar to Chelmsford down at Sophia Gardens Cardiff, where Glamorgan were bowled out for 94 thanks to Darren Stevens and Matt Henry, who claimed six and four wickets respectively, before Kent responded with 163/9. Timm van der Gugten matched Stevens with six-for. And finally at Hove, former Yorkshire seamer Oliver Robinson, sacked by the White Rose and Jason Gillespie for a series of misdemeanours a few years back, including turning up at the wrong ground for a second-team game, claimed 7-58 for Sussex against Middlesex as they bowled them out for 230. Sussex were 60-4 in reply. Division One Surrey 278-4 v Worcestershire Notts 302, Hampshire 70-3; Hampshire trail by 232 Lancashire v Somerset 321-5 Essex 142, Yorkshire 50, 161-2; Yorkshire lead by 69 Division Two Sussex 60-4, Middlesex 230; Sussex trail by 170 Glamorgan 94, Kent 163-9; Kent lead by 69 Durham v Leicestershire 301-4
0||Sale hopes of a Champions Cup place ended by George Ford’s salvoThis was a bizarre frolic to end the season for two sides with Europe on their minds. Despite the unbroken sunshine the floodlights were switched on 20 minutes into the game and the warm, dry conditions nurtured a rash of handling errors rather than continuity. Leicester had spent the previous two weeks in a daze and struggled here with blurred vision initially before George Ford gave them clarity. Sale needed to win with a bonus point to snare a Champions Cup place and they could have all but secured it by the interval. They made seven line breaks in the opening half but, if the final pass went to hand, it tended to be knocked on. The last one, when Jono Ross surged to the Leicester 22 and found AJ MacGinty, ended when what would have been a scoring pass to his half-back partner Faf de Klerk was intercepted by Jonah Holmes. Leicester had taken an early lead through Holmes after Manu Tuilagi’s thrust prompted a blindside move. Ford, standing flat, was twice involved but it was a rare example of the Tigers swiftly securing the ball at the breakdown where Tom Curry was quick to get back on his feet. The visitors’ advantage was up front, Sale’s scrum, like the ball when they attacked, tending to end on the floor. Sale, prompted by de Klerk, were quick witted, scenting space around the fringes and instantly switching on after a turnover. The Sharks had not enjoyed a week that public relations consultants dream of, forced to deny any interest in signing the shamed former Ulster players Paddy Jackson and Stuart Olding after spluttering from commercial partners. Not that fly-half is a position of particular concern with MacGinty scheming cleverly initially before Leicester – after a half-time rejoinder that instead of indulging Sale in a bun fight they should treat them to some raw beef and let Ford do the slicing – muscled up. The Tigers were too loose and haphazard in the opening half, unable to sustain pressure, but the change of approach brought an instant reward. Ben Youngs attacked round the fringes and linked with Ford – both his first-half penalties struck a post – who had a free run to the line. Leicester stayed direct and forced Sale to infringe. Two MacGinty penalties had restricted Leicester’s interval lead to a point but a pair of kicks from Ford in 10 minutes after his try put the Tigers 20-6 ahead and comfortably in control. The Leicester sides of old would have carried on in the same manner, not only until the game had been won but right to the end. Here they invited Sale back in when Telusa Veainu weaved his way out of his 22 and left three defenders trailing. He got to halfway after outpacing de Klerk but a risky pass to Sione Kalamafoni went to ground and Ben Curry picked up to commit what passed for a defence and free Marland Yarde. A near-capacity crowd celebrated the resurrection of hope. Sale had won their last two home matches against Leicester who in the previous two rounds had flopped at home to Northampton before blowing a 10-point lead late on to Newcastle, but Ford ensured that this time their grip was not broken. He continued to operate flat and in traffic and 15 minutes from time committed defenders to send May through a gap for the wing to find Mike Williams and restore the Tigers’ 14-point advantage. Sale were finally spent, Ford’s late drop goal and Holmes’s second try decorating the victory. Champions Cup qualification used to be the minimum requirement at the start of the season for Leicester but, as the salary cap has had a levelling effect, they have gone from being winners to beaten finalists to top-four finishers to top-six, a decline that has started to gather momentum. They cannot recruit A-list players in the numbers of old but Ford playing as he did here and a referee not tolerating collapsed scrums make a significant difference. The Premiership has reached the point where, with spending broadly similar, reputation counts for little. “The margins are tight,” said Leicester’s director of rugby, Matt O’Connor. “The standard has improved dramatically. I am not happy merely to be in the Champions Cup because at the start of the season our goal was to win the competition and it really hurts not being in the play-offs. We’ll be the better for this.”
13||Rangers give Steven Gerrard stark reminder of challenge to comeAfter the lord mayor’s show? The Saturday afternoon scene here was such that you would barely have known the show occurred in the first place. Exactly 24 hours after Steven Gerrard was afforded a rapturous reception by thousands of delirious fans, Rangers’ players offered a stark reminder as to why an epic shake-up was needed in the first place. Gerrard was not on hand to witness this laboured showing. He will take up office on 1 June, a situation that looked sensible as Kilmarnock offered 84 minutes of comfortable resistance. The man who breached it, David Bates, will be a Hamburg player by the time Gerrard starts his first manager’s role. This, on paper, was the easy part of Rangers’ final three games; treacherous trips to Aberdeen and Hibernian lie ahead. “We look forward to welcoming you back next season for exciting times under our new manager Steven Gerrard,” said the PA announcer in understated form at full-time. Only moments earlier, the Ibrox support had chanted the new man’s name for the first time. It was, given what had come before, curiously muted if requiring context; at the last home game Rangers’ support had held up banners in protest at what they regard as boardroom mismanagement. One swallow and all that. Gerrard will be under no illusions regarding the scale of rebuilding work required. Interestingly, he opted not to emphasise his final decision on the signature of players when unveiled to the media, instead insisting on a “teamwork” approach. Such a response is useful to conspiracy theorists, if also an indication that a novice manager cannot be expected to instantly excel at recruitment, fundamental though it is. Even before confirmation of Gerrard’s upcoming arrival, Rangers had been active in the pre-contract transfer market. Dominic Solanke is the first Liverpool player to be linked with a move north on loan; it is safe to infer the forward will not be the last. With that comes a health warning, given the numerous Premier League loanees who have toiled in Scotland. The Old Firm in particular requires a certain mind set, as linked to intensity and a necessity to win every fixture. Kilmarnock provide an image of what Rangers could have done. Their ability to coax Steve Clarke back to his native Ayrshire, with the club rooted to the foot of the table with a tally of four points from eight games, has been the most inspired move of this Scottish season. Kilmarnock, as revived on and off the park after dormant years, will finish fifth. Clarke’s effective pragmatism, plus the recruitment of the excellent Youssouf Mulumbu, have been key features. Rightly, there is focus on what Gerrard will do for the profile of Scottish football; it does the game further good to have Clarke as a key component. A stop-start first half had seen Kilmarnock come the closest to scoring. Kris Boyd’s free kick was parried by Jak Alnwick, with Kirk Broadfoot and Aaron Tshibola contriving to get in each other’s way when seeking to convert the follow-up. The most meaningful Rangers reply arrived from Jamie Murphy, who clipped the top of the bar with a clever header. The backdrop during those opening 45 minutes only highlighted why performances and results will determine Gerrard’s status beyond initial hoopla. His name was not audible at all. The UVF and Derry’s Walls, Ibrox staples, were bellowed out where the identity of the incoming manager was not. Rangers were impotent once more after the break. Alfredo Morelos, a striker whose summer sale will be pertinent in respect of what funds Gerrard has at his disposal, provided little by way of incentive to potential employers. Ibrox hoped rather than expected a breakthrough against a well- drilled side. Bates was the unlikely source of salvation, with a back-post header that roused the subdued supporters. “He’s blue, he’s white,” came the belated chorus in acclaim of Gerrard, adding a little crudely that he is also dynamite. He might have to be.
0||Exeter’s Alec Hepburn finishes off a six-try victory over HarlequinsAnother match meant another horrible defeat for Quins. At home they may have been, with the sun on their backs as they have always liked it, but they could not contain a rampant Exeter who show no signs of faltering in defence of their title. The Chiefs gave run-outs to more of their squad, the way they change players in and out as indicative of their quality as the six tries here and, indeed, as the eight points by which they top the table. Quins had their best game of the end of this wretched season, only seven points behind for most of the second half, but they shipped 17 in the last 10 minutes or so to finish the season in 10th, their worst performance since the year they were relegated in 2005. Inspired by Joe Simmonds, Exeter scored four unanswered tries in the first half alone, then finished with two more as Quins unravelled once again. It was no way to mark the departure of John Kingston, rugby’s answer to Arsène Wenger. “I’m glad it’s out the way,” he said of his final day in charge. “I haven’t got myself emotional – and I do do emotional. The future is positive. I believe the squad we’ve assembled is the strongest I’ve seen in 17 years at the club. We had 20 players missing again today. We’ve had a nightmare with it. We have a very strong squad but we’ve not seen it on the pitch this year.” Well-wishers lined the perimeter of the Stoop as Kingston embarked on a farewell lap of honour but this farewell has been long and painful, heavy defeat after heavy defeat since his exit was announced. There is no doubt this was the least debilitating of those recent losses, a bright start hinting at Quins form at last, but in the end only Northampton’s last-minute penalty denied Worcester the bonus point that would have sent Quins into 11th place. They looked a long way from such ignominy at the start, Marcus Smith scoring the game’s first try in brilliant fashion after nearly four minutes of almost unbroken possession. All it did, though, was prompt Exeter – and Simmonds in particular – to take over. By half-time Exeter’s young English fly-half had outshone Harlequins’, scoring Exeter’s fourth and converting and/or creating the other three. Dave Ewers drove over in uncomplicated fashion for Exeter’s first, before Simmonds’ clean break and glorious pass on the run to Phil Dollman paved the way for another Ewers rumble. Dave Dennis was on hand to take the latter’s inside pass for try number two. Exeter’s captain claimed number three, too, this one sparked by a Simmonds half-break that showcased a certain amount of power to take Exeter to within yards of Quins’ line, where the forwards took over. And then Simmonds himself picked a superb line off Olly Woodburn to claim Exeter’s bonus point five minutes before the break, after Santiago Cordero had caused havoc down the line and Exeter’s support runners had combined sweetly. There was time, though, for Quins to reply. Mike Brown looked back on form generally but in particular when he picked a deadly line himself off Mat Luamanu to pull Quins back to 24-17 on the stroke of half-time. The wonder is that the third quarter passed without score. Exeter replaced Simmonds with none other than the stalwart Gareth Steenson, who set the scoreboard moving again with a penalty 10 minutes from time and Exeter duly tightened their grip with two further tries, both classic Exeter, their close-quarter work round the fringes unanswerable. Suddenly Quins were looking at another ugly scoreline. Exeter, on the other hand, look as if they will be back in this neck of the woods at the end of the month.
3||Enough liberal hand-wringing – raising alcohol prices is not class warHatred of the nanny state is not only found among Conservatives raised by nannies. The left can be as libertarian as the right and as repelled by a culture dominated by prigs and killjoys. Left libertarianism powers the modern feminist approval of prostitution and its damning of traditional campaigners against the sale of women’s bodies as “whorephobes” and “swerfs” (sex worker exclusionary radical feminists, in the clunky jargon). As Scotland becomes the first country in the world to try to price drinkers out of alcoholism with minimum booze charges, the same resistance to the paternalist state is evident. The modern left is an overwhelmingly bourgeois movement and liberal guilt can always be exploited. In Scotland, four cans of beer or a bottle of wine cannot cost less than £4.50, a three-litre bottle of cider £11.25 and a bottle of vodka £13.13. Wealthy drinkers buy craft beers and fine wines and won’t be affected. Minimum pricing looks like class war from above: the prosperous telling the lower orders to “do what I say, not what I do”. From Orwell on, a strain of left-wing writing holds it natural for the overworked and exhausted to want the hit of fatty food and cheap booze. “We walked through the door at midnight at the end of a shift,” said James Bloodworth of his time in an Amazon warehouse, “kicked off our boots and collapsed on to our beds with a bag of McDonald’s and a can of beer.” As far as he and his colleagues were concerned, foodies telling them to eat a healthy diet “could go to hell”. Bloodworth, like Orwell before him, doesn’t believe a high-calorie, high alcohol diet does anything but harm. But their subtleties are lost in the general fear of seeming a snob. I’m all for liberal guilt. If liberals have a fault, it is that they are not guilty enough. But left libertarianism fails in theory and in practice. Only those who do not know what alcoholism is, or how the poor live, could entertain it. Most on low incomes don’t drink as much as the middle classes. (They can’t afford to.) Minimum pricing does not target moderate drinkers but the 5% of, generally, but not exclusively, poor people, lost in addiction. It is a truth universally unacknowledged that, like drugs cartels, the drink industry makes most of its money from addicts. It thrives on hooked customers, who put boosting the brewers’ profits before their and their families’ health and happiness. Sixty per cent of alcohol sales – worth £27bn a year in England – are to “increasing risk” drinkers taking more than 21 units of alcohol a week, in the case of men (about 10 pints or two bottles of wine), and “harmful” drinkers taking more than 50. Twenty one units (14 for women) does not sound much in my world of journalism, but it is a sign of people who cannot go a day without a shot of their drug, which is as good a definition of an addiction as any. Even at that rate, the afflicted bring on the risk of cancer, stroke, brain damage and liver failure. By the time you are topping more than 50 units (35 if you are a woman) you are at risk of full degeneration. Don’t think I’m talking only about old men on park benches. In a vain attempt to persuade Westminster to introduce minimum pricing, researchers at Sheffield University said it would limit the 63,000 alcohol-related deaths in the next five years in England and Wales. Before they go, the afflicted will have reached the stage where they can only feel well when they drink. They will sweat, vomit, succumb to an alcoholic dementia that destroys their co-ordination and memories and see their liver fail and stomach distend. As Ken Kesey succinctly described the process in One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest: “He was blind and diseased from drinking. And every time he put the bottle to his mouth, he didn’t suck out of it, it sucked out of him.” When you clear away the old snobbery about fine wines and the new snobberies about single-estate gins and craft beers, you are left with a clear view of a drinks business whose main source of revenue is sucking the life out of its customers. And out of anyone unlucky enough to know them. John Stuart Mill’s principle that adults should be free to harm themselves as long as they don’t harm others does not help the alcohol conglomerates. Unlike the trade in illegal drugs, the sale of alcohol is not conducted with violence. Instead, it provokes violence. So much violence that the British Crime Survey estimated half of all violent crime was alcohol related. The partners and children of alcoholics take the hardest hits, a fact we seem to have forgotten. The original feminist movement was well aware of the relationship between booze, rape and abuse. Cristabel Pankhurst wrote against “the great scourge” of men driven by “foul thinking and alcohol” to infect their wives with syphilis, which was incurable in the early 20th century. Josephine Butler, who led the campaign in the 1860s against the forcible genital examination of women, but not men, to see if they were carrying sexually transmitted diseases, was also a temperance campaigner. Their successors do not want prohibition today. Just prudent public health measures: minimum pricing, mandatory health warnings on bottles and an advertising ban. They do not receive the support they deserve because the old knowledge that alcohol is a feminist and socialist issue has all but died. Few want to seem an uncool prude or risk the accusation of being the world’s first Derf (drink exclusionary radical feminist, if I may coin a phrase). Fewer still understand that coolness can kill and the only way to stop the killing is to become a killjoy. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnist
18||End of the guitar? Gibson bankruptcy fuels fears for futureBruce Springsteen stood in a black T-shirt on a Broadway stage and talked about when he first discovered the power of the instrument in his hands. “The guitar,” Springsteen said, plucking at a Japanese-made Takamine P6N, his favored acoustic. “It was the key, the sword in the stone, the staff of righteousness. “As my father christened it, ‘that fucking guitar’.” Within the walls of Manhattan’s Walter Kerr theater, where the musician is now six months into his memoiristic Springsteen on Broadway residency, that instrument, the guitar, is secure in its sacred object status. But outside in Times Square, the LED news tickers were telling a different story. On Tuesday, Gibson Brands, Inc – with the biggest product line in the guitar business – filed for bankruptcy, succumbing to an estimated $500m debt load and a failed reinvention in 2014 as a “lifestyle brand”. Troubles in the land of the six-string are not restricted to Gibson. Ten years post-recession, the guitar industry in the US continues to bob, with the 2,633,000 units sold in the United States in 2017 about 5% short of where things stood in 2008, according to Music Trades magazine. The heavyweight retailer on the American scene, Guitar Center, carries $1.6bn in debt. Take into account adverse cultural and economic trends – changing musical tastes, online commerce, the lure of the smartphone and the eclipse of the guitar hero – and whispers begin to circulate about the guitar being on the way out. Unless it is already dead? “The demand for guitars has softened – that’s a story in its own right,” Chris Martin IV, CEO of the legendary acoustic guitar maker CF Martin &amp; Co, told the Guardian. “And Gibson was over-leveraged. But please don’t draw the wrong conclusions. Do not conclude that the guitar is dead. “The guitar’s been around since Mesopotamia, in some way, shape or form.” The historic durability of the instrument, however, is part of the problem with guitars, from a market perspective. Many musicians prefer used ones to new ones. And it’s never been easier to find the right used guitar. “The market has softened. It’s not as vibrant as it was in say the early 2000s,” said Brian Majeski, editor of Music Trades. “We think that an enormous factor in that has been the improved availability of used product, and the rise of a generation used to buying things on the internet.” Reverb.com, an online clearinghouse for musical instruments, will sell between $400m and $500m worth of guitars in 2018, Majeski estimated – “and almost all of them are used”. The Gibson tradition The beginning of the end for Gibson was marked by the $135m acquisition in 2014 of an audio and home entertainment business from the Dutch multinational Philips, accompanied by losing forays into consumer electronics – headphones, speakers, DJ products. “It had nothing to do with the guitar business,” Majeski said of the Gibson bankruptcy. “They bought a consumer electronics business.” Reckless though it may have been, however, Gibson’s downfall is a jarring moment for music fans who love the guitar, who grew up listening to it, and who care deeply about the tradition it represents. The company built jazz guitars for Charlie Christian and Bucky Pizzarelli, flat-top acoustics for artists from the Everly Brothers to Sheryl Crow, and the Les Paul electrics wielded by guitar heroes from Jimmy Page to Neil Young to Slash. While that heterogenous tradition might not be endangered, exactly, it takes up noticeably less cultural bandwidth than it used to, edged aside by software-based pop music, electronic dance music and hip-hop, among other currents. Displacement in music is a constant global phenomenon, said George Murer, a researcher in ethnomusicology at the City University of New York – and no instrument has benefitted so much from changing tastes as the guitar. “The guitar has entered the vernacular of so much neo-traditional music, especially north Africa, the Sahara region, even in Azerbaijan, where at weddings when they play traditional Azeri music, electric guitar is incredibly popular,” Murer said. “Same with the Sahara region, with all the Tuareg and Songhai and south Moroccan Berber and Fulani – the whole range of cultures that have long interacted across the Sahara and had some kind of exchange on the basis of these kind of plucked lutes and fiddles. Now guitar has become the centerpiece of a lot of that repertoire. “I’m pretty sure that global sales of guitars made by Fender, made by Gibson, must be at an all-time high because guitar music globally is just growing and growing.” Ed Sheeran to the rescue Much lamented as guitar sales decline has been the disappearance of the guitar hero – Clapton, Hendrix, Page et alia. Martin said business for its acoustics goes up when prominent guitar talent – think Taylor Swift or Mumford and Sons in the past decade – steps forward. “One of the big demand drivers is whenever you have a pop band playing guitars,” he said. “We all take it when we can get it, but the business doesn’t go away when that’s not happening, it just kind of levels out a little bit.” Happily for the company, Martin devotees include Ed Sheeran, whose signature guitar is manufactured by the company with a list price of $699. “The nice thing about Ed is that he is appealing to a younger customer,” said Martin. “And the guitar he plays is a very affordable Martin, so the younger customer can kind of go, ‘I can afford one of those’.” That population of younger customers who represent the next generation of guitar musicians and fans is surprisingly robust, said Phil Schaffart, a tour and production manager who opened Ground Floor Guitar, a boutique instrument retailer, two years ago in Omaha, Nebraska. “There’s still lots of kids,” he said. “I believe – it’s a little corny for me to talk about it, or maybe it doesn’t make sense or somebody doesn’t feel the same way – but rock and roll is such a real thing in music, it’s like a religion. “And I think that that is very real, and I see that all the time with young kids coming into our store and getting interested in guitar, both girls and boys. “The real main thing is putting it in their hands, making them touch it, making them feel it, and making them believe that ‘I can do this’. People get really excited about that.” Near the end of his show Wednesday night, Springsteen described a recent scene from his life, standing in a kitchen one night with his mother, talking about “all the things that guitar had brought us”. Then he bent his head, lifted his arm and made it sing.
19||Book clinic: what to read on a train journey round EuropeQ: My wife and I are retired and plan to spend June travelling by rail around central Europe and Italy. Can you recommend a few books, not too heavy for our luggage, that we can take with us? Mike Young, York A: Andrew Martin, novelist, nonfiction writer and train enthusiast, whose new novel, The Martian Girl, will be published in July Since the inquirers will be spending a lot of time on trains, I will focus on that (well-chosen) transport mode and on their destination, central Europe and Italy. Central Europe was traversed by the various incarnations of the Orient Express, and we trainspotters like to mention that Murder on the Orient Express (1934) by Agatha Christie is actually set on the Venice Simplon-Orient-Express. The plot is outrageously high concept and the railway detail accurate, Christie being a regular on the OE. In The 8.55 to Baghdad (2004), Andrew Eames traces every possible connection between Christie and the OE route. He gives insights into the queen of crime while encountering heavy scenes in the Balkans and elsewhere. Here is Sofia: “The station was ringed with people in kiosks, peering out through glass grilles patched with cracked Sellotape, like railway priests waiting to hear fare dodgers’ confessions.” Stamboul Train (1932) by Graham Greene is a torrid, cinematic thriller, and the best OE novel. Here is its arrival at Budapest: “He had a flashing glimpse of water between tall grey houses, of lights burning in upper rooms, cut off abruptly by the arch of the station…” Three of the six stories in Open All Night (1922) by Paul Morand have central European railway action. Morand is a problematic figure, being a Nazi sympathiser with a terrific prose style: “The scarlet fruit of the signal fell from its latticed trunk in obedience to the timetable.” Italian Ways (2013) by Tim Parks is about Italian railways and therefore Italian people. Parks has a bathetic eye: “A tiny vineyard, just three rows of a dozen vines each, is choked between two cathedral-sized warehouses of prefabricated concrete panels.” But in the south, the beauty of landscape and weather asserts itself, and is beautifully evoked. If you’ve got a question for Book Clinic submit it below or email bookclinic@observer.co.uk
19||Margo Jefferson: ‘I have always loved Michael Jackson’Margo Jefferson is the author of Negroland: A Memoir, which won a National Book Critics Circle award, (for autobiography) and was shortlisted for the Baillie Gifford prize. Born in Chicago, she lives in New York and has worked as an associate editor for Newsweek, and a book and theatre critic for the New York Times, where she won a Pulitzer prize for criticism. Aged 70, she now teaches at Columbia University School of Arts. Her book On Michael Jackson will be published on 3 May (Granta, £9.99). This book is about the life and work of Michael Jackson, from his early years as a child star to the “freak show” aspects of his image later on. Why write about an already well-documented life? Because I’ve always loved Michael Jackson – first in a “pure fan” way, and then as I got older it became a critic’s fascination. He was the best performer at his peak – an all-encompassing dancing, singing artist in the theatrical tradition of Fred Astaire, Sammy Davis Jr, Jackie Wilson, James Brown, with an acute sense of the mise en scène. He craved omniscient superstar status – a need to top himself with more record sales, bigger audiences, than the last time. By the time I was writing this book, he had become emblematic of complicated dilemmas, cultural obsessions, racial, gender and body metamorphoses. This book was first published in the US in 2006, three years before Jackson died. It’s now out in the UK with an updated introduction. Has your outlook on his life, and his trial for child molestation, changed since then? Yes and no. I can now feel my own struggles in this book. I was asking questions that weren’t being asked then except through underground gossip routes – on his vitiligo, on the alleged sex with little boys – to which I could get no firm answers. The final chapter, on his trial, I’d want to think through more carefully now, especially in the context of #MeToo and the Time’s Up movement, and to grapple with the asymmetries of the alleged sex abuse. You write that Michael Jackson, since his death, has been rehabilitated into the music canon – that “he got it all back with his art” after his death. Do you think we can separate his music, wonderful as it was, from the allegations that dogged him? No, we can’t. But his death allowed the canon simultaneously to reacknowledge the greatness of his art and to look at him as a damaged, harmed, and harming person. I have to live with, and keep analysing, this contradiction. In deciding I love Michael Jackson I take it all in – his music, the crimes he may have committed, his inner turmoil. I need the pleasure and the complications he gives me. As F Scott Fitzgerald said: “The test of a truly first-rate intelligence is to hold two opposing ideas in mind at the same time and still retain the ability to function.” Jackson the child star was thrown into an adult world and abused by his father but you also call him a pioneer. Can he be both victim and pioneer? I’ve long been interested in child stars. It’s a fascination that goes back to watching Shirley Temple, but in his case, a gifted child star becomes an equally gifted adult, and a ground-breaking figure. Was he a victim? He was conscripted by a domineering father into very tough, demanding work. There are accounts of the hours of rehearsing he did and the travelling. But he was also pioneering. The black child in American culture tended to be seen as someone too young to be dangerous yet. He was the male version of Topsy from Uncle Tom’s Cabin or the hired “piccaninny”. What he managed to do was to transform that “pic” into an adorable, all-American black boy. You call the adult Jackson a shape-shifter, playing with notions of gender and race. Would he have been more at home today when biology is increasingly being seen and accepted as distinct from gender? Possibly. He was interested in mixing musical genres so he mixed pop and rock with sentimental Tin Pan Alley, and it was the same with his interior and exterior construction of himself. But he was also very cautious and reticent in talking about gender and sexuality. He didn’t make daring decisions in the way Madonna did, who was willing to be openly transgressive. He was always playing the innocent. What was the first Michael Jackson record you bought? I Want You Back by The Jackson 5. It was when they were still putting out 45s. I was dancing to it at every party so I bought the record. His fans then were people in their 20s who’d grown up on Motown but saw the politics of Berry Gordy’s Motown as so middle-of-the-road. Is there a black singer alive today breaking as many boundaries? I don’t know yet if they’re breaking the same kind of ground – someone like Kendrick Lamar is addressing race in interesting ways. And Beyoncé is combining music with the theatre and dance tradition – but I have to wait and see. What kind of music do you listen to? It depends on the time of day, my mood, what I’m writing. I’ll listen to classical music, jazz, songs from the great American song book, Nigerian pop, minimalism. It’s an unholy mix. Is the US a better place to live than it used to be for black Americans? It is in terms of culture. If you look at the arts pages of the New York Times, which are very mainstream, a variety of artists will be represented – Latino, black, Asian. It’s the same with Hollywood, TV and literature. There are nonwhite legacies and traditions pushing forward and being acknowledged in ways they haven’t been before. But it’s a fraught time. Injustices are being acknowledged but the push-back is terrifying. What’s the last really great book you read? A book of poems by Layli Long Soldier called Whereas. She is so linguistically sophisticated. The collection is a combination of poetry as personal, family and psychic narrative, with poetry as cultural and political narrative. Which novelists and nonfiction writers working today do you most admire? Now that I’m no longer a beat critic, I look for books that provide intellectual stimulation or that might be interesting to teach. Often I’m looking for writers who work in the same form as me, so I like the essayist experimentation of Yiyun Li, and I like Claudia Rankine, Maggie Nelson, Fred Moten. I follow critics, too: Darryl Pinckney in the New York Review of Books and Jacqueline Rose in the London Review of Books. I’ve recently read White Tears by Hari Kunzru, which I loved, and Ayòbámi Adébáyò’s Stay With Me – her writing is a great pleasure. I like reading Nell Zink and I’m just starting Rachel Kushner’s first novel, Telex from Cuba, because I thought her second, The Flamethrowers, was amazing. Do you prefer to read on paper or a screen? I still like to read the old-fashioned way but I do read on screen when I travel. I have an iPad and I’m happy to download books but in my house and on the subway I still like reading physical books. I love the way they look and to hold them. I still get the newspaper delivered to my door. Which classic novel are you most ashamed not to have read? So many. A few years ago I did War and Peace. That helped assuage my guilt. To order a copy of On Michael Jackson for £8.49 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99.
20||'I was capturing living history': Jim Grover on his photographs of south London's WindrushersAmid the furore surrounding the mistreatment of Caribbean-born British citizens by the Home Office appears an exhibition, Windrush: Portrait of a Generation, to be shown in central London, just across the water from Westminster. Jim Grover, a documentary photographer, set out to capture the daily lives and customs of the Windrush generation in the heart of the south London community where he lives. The project began in June 2017 in Grover’s church, where a parishioner invited him to see the clubs where he played “bones” or dominoes. “It was a revelation to me,” says Grover. “I had no idea that Caribbean migrants met three times a week for dominoes in Clapham, where I’ve lived for 30 years.” Intrigued, he began to visit domino clubhouses in Clapham, Croydon and Wandsworth. At first, people were wary of the stranger with a camera, but soon Grover was welcomed into homes, community centres, places of worship and even funerals. Grover discovered a much more important story waiting to be told: “I wanted to capture a Caribbean way of life that most likely won’t be around for ever.” He adds: “I feel so privileged to have been able to photograph the distinctive lives of this lovely community.” Timed to coincide with the 70th anniversary of the arrival of Empire Windrush at Tilbury in June 1948, the exhibition incorporates a number of interviews Grover conducted with Caribbean-born UK residents. “I knew I had to track down at least one surviving ‘Windrusher’ if I were to do justice to this story,” he says. His research took him to 92-year-old Alford Gardner in Leeds, who served in the RAF during the war as a motor mechanic. Having paid the standard £28 to cross the Atlantic on the Windrush, Gardner found work in Leeds with commercial engineers. Inevitably, as a Caribbean “room-seeker” back then he experienced racism (“Room to Let: Regret No Kolored”, ran the typical advert). Usually, though, there was no violence, as any aggressors fled once challenged. “I’ve lived a brilliant life here,” he told Grover. “It was supposed to be tough, but I never really had tough times.” In migrating here, the Windrush citizens believed they were exercising their birthright. “UK – Right of Abode” was stamped in their Commonwealth-issue passports. Teachers, lawyers, writers, artists and field labourers came in response to a recruitment drive and because they hoped for a better life. Not all of the Windrushers had intended to remain “in foreign”, but gradually it dawned on them that the dream of return was just that: they were here to stay. Curated by Katy Barron, the exhibition combines personal stories from first- and second-generation Caribbeans with a series of 12 themed photo-stories that, together, seek to describe the “totality” of their lives today. It explores the community, faith, love, death and friendship; it looks at the lives of metalworkers, engineers, churchgoers and former NHS nurses. With his genial manner, Grover was granted access to photograph a Jamaican funeral and its Nine Night mortuary custom, where friends and relatives gather at the deceased’s house for food and drink. The tradition is fast disappearing among the young, but there is life in it yet. (As they say in Jamaica: “No call a man dead til you bury him.”) “Jamaican spirituality is such a beautiful thing,” says Grover, who wanted to capture Caribbean religious respect for a life well lived. His previous photographic exhibitions have documented a year in the life of a Clapham vicar, called Of Things Unseen, and the busy life of a neighbourhood, in last year’s 48 Hours on Clapham High Street. He shoots with a wide-angle lens: “That means getting in really close. At the Jamaican funeral I was literally standing at the grave’s edge. It required a good deal of trust.” For this project, Grover took photographs on 70 occasions. “In order to capture a dominoes match and its after-party, I sometimes had my camera out for long stretches – seven or eight hours. At other times, I just sat and listened to stories and watched life unfold in front of me.” The photographs are poignant and intimate. We see calypso-mento dancers in their “felts” (fedora hats) and domino hotshots banging down tiles. At crowded festive dance parties, or “bashments”, he photographed the elderly moving and flexing to jazz-tinged ska, rock-steady and reggae. The dapper Bockie, a regular at the Cosmo club in Wandsworth, told him: “Our generation… we’re rocking our bodies in our chairs.” Between 1948 and 1969, the formative years of the NHS, an estimated 5,000 Jamaican women came to the UK to work as nurses, while many others worked in different NHS roles. Monica Blair, one of Grover’s 12 photo subjects, arrived from Jamaica in 1964, aged 21, to marry Soney and worked as a cleaner at St Thomas’ hospital near Westminster, before becoming a seamstress. With her deep religious faith, Monica attends the same Anglican church in Clapham as Grover. In his photographs, she ministers communion wine and pores over a well-thumbed Bible, a gift to her as a teenager in Jamaica. By his own admission a “perfectionist” as a photographer, Grover scoured the south London streets in search of one of the famed “front rooms” and found one in Brixton. Once a part of every Jamaican home, front rooms typically contained framed family photographs, a picture of Jesus walking on water, sofas covered in protective plastic, leopardskin rugs and bouquets of artificial flowers. Often, a gold, plastic model of Big Ben or some other shooting-gallery prize graced a giant cocktail cabinet with a Formica top. The rooms are nearly all gone now. “They speak of a bygone era,” says Grover. “Sadly, to the second- and third-generations they’re just clutter.” Towards the end of his project, Grover was invited to photograph a Friday “open house” typical of Caribbean life. In the Brixton home of Hermine Grocia, as many as four generations gather each week for food, chat, a quiz or a game of Scrabble. “I wasn’t even sure I had space for it in the exhibition,” he says, “but I am so pleased to have spent the evening with Hermine and 21 of her family. It was so moving to see this wonderful family be so loving, relaxed and connected… they get together every Friday. It was the last thing I shot, and it ended the project for me on such a high.” Hermine met her future husband, Lester, on the Kingston wharf in 1959, just as they were about to sail for “Missus Queen’s” country. Like most of the Windrush generation, she had come to the UK determined to work. Grover’s moving and often beautiful photographs show the other side of the current Windrush scandal: they celebrate a community and a generation that contributed immeasurably to our cultural life. “The more I immersed myself in this project,” Grover says, “the more I realised that I was capturing living history. As this generation passes away, and the successive generations pursue their own lives here, some of these traditions will inevitably weaken. It felt imperative to document this way of life and to record these stories before it becomes too late.” Windrush: Portrait of a Generation is at gallery@Oxo, Oxo Tower Wharf, London SE1, 23 May-10 June. Ian Thomson’s The Dead Yard: A Story of Modern Jamaica, is published by Faber Visit the website for the Windrush: Portrait of a Generation photo essay
13||Rochdale pull off great escape, Barnet drop out of Football LeagueLeague One Joe Thompson’s second-half winner completed Rochdale’s fairytale escape from relegation as they saw off play-bound Charlton to leapfrog Oldham on the final day. Rochdale were 11 points from safety in February – albeit with games in hand – but Thompson, playing again after overcoming cancer twice in three years, scored to complete a dramatic escape from relegation. Oldham drew at already-relegated Northampton, taking the lead through Sam Edmundson only to end the first half behind. Thomas Haymer’s equaliser was set to keep them up until Thompson struck for Rochdale. The Latics, inaugural members of the Premier League in 1992, drop into the fourth tier for the first time since 1971. Will Grigg’s 19th goal of the season earned victory for Wigan at Doncaster to seal the League One title. Blackburn won 2-1 against Oxford but had to settle for second place despite accruing 96 points. Charlton finished sixth as Plymouth failed to find the big win they needed to scrape into the play-offs, instead slumping to a 5-2 defeat at Gillingham. Scunthorpe drew 1-1 with Bradford to finish fifth and will play Rotherham, who beat Blackpool 1-0, in the play-offs. Third-placed Shrewsbury lost 1-0 at home to relegated MK Dons. League Two Barnet have been relegated from the Football League for the third time in their history despite a last-day 3-0 victory over Chesterfield at the Hive. John Akinde’s goal just before half-time set Martin Allen’s side up for the win they needed, with Richard Brindley and Alex Nicholls adding late goals against already-relegated opponents. The win proved to be in vain as Morecambe picked up a 0-0 draw at Coventry. Both teams needed a point to achieve their respective goals – safety for the visitors, and a play-off place for Coventry. The Sky Blues also secured their first top-six position in any division since 1970. Lincoln City also secured a play-off spot in their first season back in the fourth tier with a 1-1 draw against Yeovil. Exeter will face the Imps in the semi-finals after wrapping up fourth place, Robbie Simpson getting the winner against Colchester. Notts County will play Coventry after drawing 0-0 with promoted Luton. Mansfield needed a win to have any chance of sneaking into the top seven but fell behind early to Crawley and could only draw, with Kane Hemmings equalising just past the hour. Swindon beat the champions, Accrington Stanley, 3-0 at the County Ground and finished ninth. Finishing with a flourish were Cambridge, who thrashed Port Vale 5-0 with five different scorers, and Grimsby, who continued their good end-of-season form with a 3-0 win at Forest Green, JJ Hooper getting a hat-trick.
16||Thousands of Scottish independence supporters march through GlasgowTens of thousands of independence supporters marched through the streets of Glasgow, aiming to bring Scotland’s largest city to a standstill. Marchers draped in Saltires waved flags and played bagpipes and drums as they walked from Kelvingrove to Glasgow Green on Saturday. The event is one of a series being held across Scotland by All Under One Banner. The pro-independence organisation aims to march at regular intervals “until Scotland is free”. “Glasgow city centre will be brought to a standstill as our independence march traverses through en route to George Square,” one member of the organisation said on a fundraising page before the event. The march achieved a high turnout. Police Scotland estimated that 35,000 people joined the procession, which ended with speeches and music on the green. A small number of pro-union campaigners met the procession to counter its message. Stuart McMillan, a MSP for the Scottish National party, wrote on Twitter that he had received abuse including “a azi salute and the middle finger” from pro-union campaigners. Amanda McGinley took part in the march with her daughter Ellie Casson, with both women sporting Saltire bows in their hair. “We’re just basically fighting for the cause. We’re serial marchers,” she said. Lesley Crawford said she had come to show support. “There is still a lot of people who are still campaigning for a vote for independence, and we’re not going away,” she said. Although the 2014 referendum led to a 55% vote in favour of staying in the UK,and 45% against, marcher Geoff Craig was confident independence campaigners could win a second referendum. He said that level of support for Scotland leaving the UK was “a good place to start from” and that backing for independence was edging up.
21||Tories would fail their Ofsted test, Angela Rayner tells teachersThe shadow education secretary, Angela Rayner, has attacked the government’s record on schools, telling a conference the Tories “wouldn’t survive their own Ofsted inspection”. Rayner, who left school pregnant at 16 with poor grades, told the National Association of Head Teachers (NAHT) annual conference that the government’s record on education has meant targets for teacher recruitment had not been met for five years. She said more teachers were now leaving than joining the profession and 500,000 children were in “supersize” classes, while teachers have had their pay capped. “I went to a so-called failing school and it was that school, those teachers, that headteacher, those support staff, all of the people there that made me the resilient person that can stand in front of you today, that has become the education secretary elect and has done so well,” she said. “Because you taught me about making sure that you respect yourself and you are valued and loved regardless of what other people say. That’s what good schools do.” To applause from delegates at the conference in Liverpool, she said the Tories “wouldn’t survive their own Ofsted inspection”. Rayner said Labour was committed to creating a “cradle to grave” national education service, “a meaningful and radical transformation of our education system”, and asked the NAHT for its help to shape the policy. Rayner said funding spent on education was money well spent and an investment for the future. “People say, well that’s ridiculous, how can you afford it, Labour’s ‘spend, spend, spend’. But you know what? We are spending so much money on making children and young people feel bad and then catch up at a later date in adolescence, where we are having to spend money in the wrong place,” she said. The general secretary of NAHT, Paul Whiteman, said: “We’ll be engaging with Labour’s consultation on their national education service and their other policies which affect young people. “As I said in my conference speech, education is the best route to a happy and fulfilling future for our young people, and the only silver bullet to solving the problems in our society.”
13||West Brom 1-0 Spurs, Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea, Barnet down and more – as it happenedThat’s about it for today’s Clockwatch. We’ll have more match reports on the website shortly. Thanks for your company, bye! Ed Aarons was at the Vitality Stadium on behalf of you, dearest reader. Here’s his report from Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea. Here’s a bit more on Stoke’s relegation from your friend and mine, Nick Miller. West Brom’s matchwinner Jake Livermore speaks “I don’t know what to say really. We’ve got that never-say-die attitude back. All we can do is take it game by game. We’ve been together all season despite our results. Hopefully we’ll get another win and see where it takes us.” “West Brom,” says Bill Hargreaves, “are going to do a Leicester and with the Premier League next year.” “So Rob,” says Kevin Porter. “I took your advice and bet my mortagage on Coverntry and Morecambe ending 0-0. And after 10 minutes of nail biting anxiety that I might lose my home, I’m now £2.45 better off. Gee thanks, buddy. “ We’ll have reaction and match reports shortly. In the meantime, there’s plenty more live football for you to follow. You won’t believe the scores! And here’s a round up of the main news so far Stoke have been relegated to the Championship, but West Brom are still hanging on by a fingernail Barnet have been relegated to the National League The four teams in the League Two play-offs are Exeter, Notts County, Coventry and Lincoln My bloody Fantasy Football hopes are in tatters These are the final scores in today’s featured games Premier League Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Leicester 0-2 West Ham Watford 2-1 Newcastle West Brom 1-0 Spurs League Two Barnet 3-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 1-1 Crawley SPL Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 1-0 Kilmarnock Coventry and Morecambe have played out a mutually agreeable 0-0 draw, which means Barnet are relegated to the National League. West Brom have done it again! They still need a miracle, but it’s been a preposterous run under Darren Moore: 11 points from five games. West Ham are surely safe after a terrific win at the King Power Stadium, in which Mark Noble scored a beautiful volley. A tame performance from Swansea, who will slip into the relegation places if Southampton win at Everton tonight. Barnet did their job, but they are going down because of the draw between Coventry and Morecambe. A good win for Watford, which ensures they will be playing Premier League football next season. I think Jake Livermore scored the winner against his old club, though nobody is quite sure who got the last touch. West Brom have scored!!! They are staying up for a bit longer! Alex Nicholls scores a superb goal to extend Barnet’s lead. They need four more in the last two minutes to move above Morecambe on goal difference. Coventry and Morecambe both declared at 0-0 after about an hour of their game. Swindon 3-0 Accrington James Dunne of Swindon and Jimmy Dunne of Accrington have both been sent off at the same time, presumably after an argument about Christian name abbreviations. David Bates has scored an important late goal at Ibrox. As a result, Rangers still have realistic hopes of finishing second. West Brom 0-0 Tottenham Daniel Sturridge is 28 years old. Barnet are going down with honour. Richard Brindley’s goal has secured a fifth victory in the last eight games under Martin Allen. The substitute Tom Pett has equalised for Lincoln! A draw would be enough to put them in the play-offs with Coventry, Exeter and Notts County. West Brom 0-0 Spurs West Brom, who need a win to stay up, have taken off both their forwards. Mansfield 1-1 Crawley Mansfield have had a goal disallowed for offside. As things stand, a winning goal would put them into the play-offs ahead of Lincoln. Coventry 0-0 Morecambe You can put the mortgage on a 0-0 draw. We’ve been here before. These are the latest scores in our featured games Premier League Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Leicester 0-2 West Ham Watford 2-1 Newcastle West Brom 0-0 Spurs League Two Barnet 1-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 1-1 Crawley SPL Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 0-0 Kilmarnock West Brom 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur Harry Kane is denied by a brilliant save from ... Hugo Lloris. That would have been a strange own goal. “Does he know own-goals don’t count towards the Golden Boot?” sniggers Matt Le Tissier on Sky Sports. West Brom 0-0 Tottenham West Brom are playing with 10 men behind the ball, diligently holding on to the draw that will secure relegation. Coventry 0-0 Morecambe With both teams needing only a draw, the match has started to become a bit of a non-event. Barnet won’t be happy but it looks like they are going down to the National League. That’s a big goal at the One Call Stadium. Mansfield are level, and one more goal could put them in the play-offs. If they win and Lincoln lose - they are 1-0 down to Yeovil - Mansfield will be in the play-offs. “For fans of Scottish football, deciding what the worst game you’ve ever seen is easy,” says Simon McMahon. “It’s always the next one.” West Brom 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur Danny Rose is booked for putting hands on Allan Nyom, who visits the canvas in absurd fashion. West Ham are surely staying up. The captain Mark Noble has doubled their lead with a storming long-range volley at Filbert Street. “Bit harsh to cite this game as evidence of Spurs’ impending decline,” says SF Devereux. “Thanks to WBA’s turgid anti-football, that first 45 minutes might make this the worst game I’ve ever watched, beating the long-time previous holder - a 1980s charity game between a Winsford United XI and the cast of Brookside.” What about that Jimmy Corkhill, eh? What a beautiful false nine he was. Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Steve Cook has missed a great chance to make it 2-0, heading over from close range. Newcastle, who were beyond inept in the first half, are back in the game at Vicarage Road thanks to a classy half-volley from Ayoze Perez. It’s all quiet at the start of the second half. Thus, I have precisely nothing to say except that these are the latest scores in our featured matches. Premier League Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Leicester 0-1 West Ham Watford 2-0 Newcastle West Brom 0-0 Spurs League Two Barnet 1-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 0-1 Crawley SPL Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 0-0 Kilmarnock West Brom 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur Salomon Rondon, usually so deadly in front of goal, has missed a great chance to put the home side ahead at Stoney Lane. Peep peep! The second halves are under way. Barnet or Morecambe are 45 minutes away from the National League; West Brom need a goal or they will be going down to the Championship. Half-time chit-chat “Classic Machiavellian two-point plan from Benitez: get enough points to be safe, then be rubbish for the rest of the season to say ‘well what can I do, we need investment,’” says Shaun Wilkinson. “Genius!” “Holy heat maps you should be watching the game at The Hawthorns,” says JR in Illinois. “Other than two saves by Foster and an Eriksen free kick that hit the wall West Brom have literally not touched the ball. (That is a factually correct statement now that the word ‘literally’ has been defined as meaning both literally and not literally.) Looks like the fans are being treated to one final dose of Pulis-ball before they get relegated. This is really something else.” That’s the end of a fairly quiet opening 45 minutes in the big games around Britain. As things stand West Brom are going down, and so are Barnet, but it’s all exquisitely tight. These are the half-time scores in our featured games. Premier League Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Leicester 0-1 West Ham Watford 2-0 Newcastle West Brom 0-0 Spurs League Two Barnet 1-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 0-1 Crawley SPL Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 0-0 Kilmarnock Barnet are doing their job. A win will complete an astonishing escape if Coventry beat Morecambe. It’s currently 0-0 at Highfield Road. Spurs finished last season in brutal form, winning their last two games 6-1 and 7-1. This season is petering out somewhat, not helped by Harry Kane’s poor form. I wonder whether we might eventually reflect on that FA Cup semi-final defeat as the end of an era. The latest scores in our featured games Premier League Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Leicester 0-1 West Ham Watford 2-0 Newcastle West Brom 0-0 Spurs League Two (selected fixtures) Barnet 0-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 0-1 Crawley SPL (selected fixtures) Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 0-0 Kilmarnock “Currently 0-0 between Cove and Cowdenbeath,” boasts Simon McMahon. “If it’s drama Ian Copestake is after he may be interested in a play I’m currently working on about Scottish football, called The Comedy of Basic Schoolboy Errors. It’s a tragicomedy.” It’s a tragedy, isn’t it. Paul Dummett is absurdly penalised for a foul on fresh air - but Troy Deeney’s penalty is saved by Martin Dubravka! Bournemouth wanted a penalty - but it doesn’t matter because they have scored from the free-kick. It was worked neatly to Ryan Fraser, whose shot took a deflection and beat Fabianski. That’s exceedingly good news for Southampton. Bournemouth 0-0 Swansea A bit of controversy at the Vitality Stadium, where Callum Wilson is fouled right on the line of the penalty area. Bournemouth want a penalty; the referee gives a free-kick. Shortly after hitting the bar himself, the talismanic Marko Arnautovic sets up Joao Mario for the opening goal. This would be a huge win for West Ham. Matt Green has missed a great chance to equalise for Lincoln. His penalty was saved and he smacked the rebound against the bar. West Brom 0-0 Spurs Harry Kane has been denied by an excellent save from Ben Foster at the Hawthorns. Andre Gray heads into an empty net to extend Watford’s lead over a listless Newcastle. Watford are staying up. Barnet continue to dominate Chesterfield at the Hive, but it’s still 0-0. They need to win to have any chance of staying up. These are the latest scores in today’s, er, featured matches. Just count those goals! Premier League Bournemouth 0-0 Swansea Leicester 0-0 West Ham Watford 1-0 Newcastle West Brom 0-0 Spurs League Two (selected fixtures) Barnet 0-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 0-1 Crawley SPL (selected fixtures) Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 0-0 Kilmarnock Leicester 0-0 West Ham West Ham are dominating at the King Power Stadium, albeit without creating many clear chances. It’s all a bit quiet in the Premier League, with just the one goal at Vicarage Road. Bournemouth 0-0 Swansea Swansea are under a lot of pressure at the Vitality Stadium. Andrew Surman has missed an excellent chance for Bournemouth. Still no goals at the bottom of League Two: it’s Barnet 0-0 Chesterfield and Coventry 0-0 Morecambe. Bournemouth 0-0 Swansea Asmir Begovic has denied Swansea with an excellent double save. If Swansea win today you’d have to fancy them to stay up; their last two games are at home to Southampton and Stoke. Bad news for Lincoln, who are hanging on to the last play-off place in League Two. They need a draw to ensure a place, though they can afford to lose if Mansfield fail to win at home to Crawley. This is the stage of the season when everyone has one particular phrase to hand: “as it stands”. With that in mind, I’d like you to consider the as it stands table on the last day of the Divizia C, Seria VIII-a 1983-84 season. An important goal in the battle for League Two play-off places. Mansfield, who need to win to have any chance of sneaking into the top seven, have gone behind at home to Crawley. “Hi Rob,” says Felix Wood. “Why doesn’t Will Hughes get mentioned for England? We’re not exactly overwhelmed with two-footed, hard-running creative midfielders. Surely must be worth a punt, especially if the alternatives are Shelvey and Livermore.” He’s got the potential to play international football but that’s all it is at this stage, no? A full season in the Premier League would help. “One effect of Stoke getting relegated is three extra points for my Arsenal next season (though given our away form, that’s not really guaranteed),” says AB Parker. “No more away trips to the Britannia, and Ramsey getting booed for getting his leg broken. I have a few friends who are Stoke fans who I feel bad for, but their general behaviour towards Ramsey and chants about him walking with a limp will not be missed.” Watford will be mathematically safe if they win, though realistically they can afford to lose 472-1. An early goal at Vicarage Road, where Roberto Pereyra has curled Watford into the lead and completely jiggered my Fantasy Football title challenge. “Having been eye deep in proofreading, I need some drama to distract me,” says Ian Copestake. “I would usually follow Arnautovic around as I think he is top and could be top, top. But something perverse draws me to West Brom.” The 3pm matches are about to kick off. Let’s do some football! “Hey Rob,” says JR in Illinois. “As a West Brom fan I got all my complaining out of the way already. I wanted Pulis out before it was fashionable. I was always willing to risk going down if it meant not watching Pulis-ball. What I wasn’t willing to do was ever accept Alan Pardew as manager. That was a sickenating slap in the face. But now that it’s just about over there’s nothing of immediate concern to complain about, which is kind of a weird feeling. At least the Baggies weren’t first to get relegated!” “Afternoon Rob,” says Simon McMahon. “A contender for Clockwatch Guest Fixture of the Week must be Cove Rangers v Cowdenbeath in the first leg of the play off to decide which of those teams will be playing senior league football next season. Nothing against Cove, but Cowdenbeath’s 137-year history is on the line here, with a realistic chance of the club folding should they lose over the two legs. Plus my brother in law is a fan of the Blue Brazil, though he was at Tannadice last night to see United make it through to the Scottish Premiership play off semi final by beating Dunfermline. By the way, the United keeper injured himself performing a cartwheel to celebrate United’s equaliser and had to be carried off. I wonder what Jim McLean would have thought about that?” “No Hart or Chicharito on the bench for West Ham,” notes Ian Sargeant. “Story?” Hernandez has a knee injury. Hart is, officially at least, suffering with illness. After 10 years of Premier League overachievement, Stoke have gone back to the Championship after a 2-1 defeat at home to Crystal Palace. Follow the reaction with Scott Murray. West Brom v Spurs team news West Brom (4-4-2) Foster; Nyom, Dawson, Hegazi, Gibbs; Phillips, Livermore, Brunt, McClean; Rondon, Rodriguez. Spurs (3-4-2-1) Lloris; Alderweireld, Sanchez, Vertonghen; Trippier, Wanyama, Alli, Rose; Eriksen, Lamela; Kane. Palace have taken the lead at the bet365 Stadium, which means Stoke are going down as things stand. Join Scott Murray for more news. You won’t believe the score! Watford v Newcastle team news Watford (4-4-2) Karnezis; Janmaat, Cathcart, Kabasele, Holebas; Hughes, Doucoure, Capoue, Pereyra; Gray, Deeney. Newcastle (4-2-3-1) Dubravka; Manquillo, Lascelles, Lejeune, Dummett; Shelvey, Diame; Murphy, Perez, Kenedy; Gayle. Leicester v West Ham team news Leicester (4-4-1-1) Hamer; Benalouane, Morgan, Maguire, Fuchs; Mahrez, Silva, Iborra, Choudhury; Diabate; Vardy. West Ham (3-4-2-1) Adrian; Rice, Ogbonna, Cresswell; Zabaleta, Kouyate, Noble, Masuaku; Joao Mario, Lanzini; Arnautovic. Bournemouth v Swansea team news Bournemouth (3-4-3) Begovic; Francis, S Cook, Ake; Fraser, L Cook, Surman, Daniels; King, Wilson, Pugh. Swansea (4-4-2) Fabianski; van der Hoorn, Fernandez, Mawson, Olsson; Dyer, Ki, Carroll, Roberts; A Ayew, J Ayew. Crystal Palace have equalised at the Whatever Stoke’s Stadium is Called These Days Stadium, which is terrible news for Stoke. Scott Murray has the latest. SPL There’s a huge game at Pittodrie. Second-placed Aberdeen host Hibs, who are two places and three points behind. Rangers, in third, are at home to Kilmarnock, though Steven Gerrard will not be in charge until the end of the season. League Two The big games are at the bottom, where either Barnet or Morecambe will be relegated to the National League. Barnet are two points behind with an inferior goal difference, so they need to win at home to Chesterfield, who are already relegated, and hope Morecambe lose at Coventry. There is plenty for Coventry to play for - they need a point to ensure a play-off place. If Barnet survive, it will be one of the greatest escapes. Here are all today’s League Two fixtures, and this is the league table as it stands. Championship and League One Nothing to see here: the final Championship games are tomorrow, and the final League One games kick off at 5.30pm tonight. The Premier League There are four 3pm kick-offs, all involving teams who could still be relegated. Bournemouth v Swansea Leicester v West Ham Watford v Newcastle West Brom v Spurs The most important game is Swansea’s trip to Bournemouth, though West Ham could still be dragged into the filth. Bournemouth and Watford are not mathematically safe either. West Brom are already breast deep in the filth and will go down if they don’t beat Spurs today. And if Stoke beat Crystal Palace in the early game, West Brom will be relegated before kick off. If you want do the mathematics yourself, here’s the Premier League table. It’s business time. To some, that phrase might stimulate unwanted images of, say, Mick Hucknall consumed by lascivious desperation, exhaling erratically in all directions, but here we speak only of football. It’s the business end of the season, the penultimate weekend in the Premier League and the final day of the regular season in League Ones and Two. I’ll be keeping several eyes on the important 3pm kick-offs across Britain, more of which anon. In the meantime, you can follow Stoke’s must-win game at home to Crystal Palace with Scott Murray.
13||Bournemouth leave Swansea teetering after Ryan Fraser seals victoryIf Swansea are to survive this season of highs and lows, then they are going to have to do it the hard way. Ryan Fraser’s first-half strike was enough to inflict a third successive defeat on Carlos Carvalhal’s side, who have lost form just when it matters most. From a position of relative security a few weeks ago, they are now in serious danger of slipping through the trapdoor. At least their manager could console himself with the fact that, with Tuesday’s crucial home fixture against Southampton and another against already-relegated Stoke City to come, Swansea’s fate remains in their own hands. Yet on this evidence, after a seventh match in a row without a victory, they could be on borrowed time, even if Carvalhal appeared relaxed about the nerve-wracking week he has ahead. “I’m not worried because we depend on ourselves,” insisted the Portuguese. “When I arrived, if I had said at that moment that we would have two games at home left to stay in the Premier League, then nobody would have believed it. When you have something in your hands, let’s do it. At the Liberty we are strong and the fans can make a big impact. When we depend on ourselves we can do it all the time. We don’t need to hear about other teams on the radio or on television.” He added: “Tuesday will be a game that will decide a lot of things – we’ve known about that since I arrived. I believe we will stay in the Premier League.” Given that his side had failed to win on the road since the victory over Watford in his first match after replacing Paul Clement at the end of December, it was no surprise to see Carvalhal opt for a safety-first approach to his starting lineup against Bournemouth. Perhaps with the showdown with Southampton in mind, he opted to leave Sam Clucas and Kyle Naughton out to give them a chance to be ready for Tuesday. With their own Premier League status for another season virtually confirmed even before kick-off despite Eddie Howe’s protestations to the contrary, there was a carnival atmosphere for Bournemouth’s last home game of the campaign, on a beautiful day on the south coast. The home side’s intent was clear from the start and they almost took the lead inside the first 90 seconds when Federico Fernández did well to deny Callum Wilson a clear-cut chance. Mike van der Hoorn then should have put Swansea ahead in the 12th minute, after an excellent free-kick routine, but Asmir Begovic was there to deny him. Wilson was the next to waste an opportunity after a delightful ball across goal from Fraser, but, prompted by Lewis Cook’s industry in midfield, Bournemouth continued to dominate proceedings. Yet Swansea, and Alfie Mawson in particular, were the architects of their own downfall when they fell behind eight minutes before half-time. A moment’s hesitation from the defender allowed Wilson to nip in front of him and Mawson was lucky referee Kevin Friend did not point to the spot after bringing down his opponent just inside the box. He was the first to react to Bournemouth’s quickly taken free-kick, but could only divert Fraser’s shot past a helpless Lukasz Fabianski with his head. Jordan Ayew had the chance to equalise immediately, after excellent interplay with his older brother, but his shot went embarrassingly wide of the target. The second half also began with Ayew going close, although, this time, he at least forced Begovic into another save after creating space for himself. An increasingly fretful Carvalhal paced the touchline like a man possessed whenever Bournemouth came close to threatening at the other end, with Steve Cook wasting a great chance from Joshua King’s cross. The manager threw on Tammy Abraham in place of the ineffective Nathan Dyer and the Chelsea loanee at least gave Swansea a platform from which to build attacks, even if no real chances of note actually materialised. Nathan Aké could have put Carvalhal out of his misery 15 minutes from time, but he headed straight at Fabianski when well placed, while Wilson will be wondering how he didn’t convert late on after a point-blank save from the Polish goalkeeper. “I think we will score – I’m not really worried because we have players who can score, even if they have not been scoring for the past few games,” said Carvalhal. Swansea fans will be hoping some of their manager’s confidence rubs off on his players over the next 48 hours.
13||Paul Lambert says Stoke sleepwalked towards relegation but will returnPaul Lambert said Stoke City sleepwalked into trouble after their relegation from the Premier League was confirmed by their 2-1 home defeat by Crystal Palace. The loss condemns Stoke to the Championship after a decade in the top flight, with Lambert unable to save them after he was appointed to replace Mark Hughes in January, taking over with the team in 18th. They have won only one of Lambert’s 14 games in charge but he suggested the damage was done before he arrived. “Your season starts in July,” he said. When you don’t get results you sleepwalk into situations you never want to be and we never had enough. I’m gutted for everybody, because it’s a brilliant club. When it rebuilds it will be really strong.” An error by Ryan Shawcross, club captain and the only player left from when Stoke won promotion to the top flight in 2008, gifted Crystal Palace their late winner and he looked close to tears after the final whistle. “It didn’t happen over one game,” Shawcross said. “We’ve not been good enough all season, and ultimately that’s down to the players.” Scoring goals and an inability to hold on to leads when they did find the net have been two of the most obvious causes for Stoke’s relegation, something Lambert acknowledged. “It’s people being anxious, worried about what might happen when we’ve got the lead,” he said, when asked about the 12 points they have surrendered from winning positions since his appointment. “That’s what we’ve got,” he said, about their striking options. “The top end of the pitch, right across it, I don’t think it’s been good enough. We lacked that natural instinct of a goalscorer. Not just a goalscorer, but creativity as well. I don’t think we’re well balanced in that area.” Lambert admitted Stoke would have needed to rebuild even if they had survived, a process that will begin after their final game of the season, against Swansea next weekend. “The football club will come back fighting because of the support it’s got behind it,” he said. “The football team should mirror the supporters.”
10||Teachers to protest at Kentucky Derby, a symbol of state's inequalityTeachers’ union activists in a state that saw a dramatic strike last month plan to protest at the running of the Kentucky Derby at Churchill Downs on Saturday. After last month’s Kentucky teachers’ strike, the state Republican majority chose to take control of the heavily black Jefferson county public school system, based in the Louisville area. Governor Matt Bevin said it was because of concerns about finances. Union leaders say Bevin is punishing teachers for striking. “That sure looks like pure retribution to us,” said National Education Association president Lily Eskelsen García. “Here you have Kentucky lawmakers angry that those upstart teachers demanded that something better is done for school funding and their students.” To many activists, the Kentucky Derby and its crowd of dignitaries, including Bevin, represent everything wrong with what some consider still a racially divided, Jim Crow state. “Kentucky does an extremely poor job of grappling with its history of racism. Symbols like the Kentucky Derby matter,” said Attica Scott, the only black woman in the Kentucky statehouse. For years a union organizer, Scott has helped previous protests at the Derby, for the rights of immigrant workers. At the 170,000-seat, 147-acre Churchill Downs complex, some seats cost as much as $6,000. But the course sits in a relatively poor Latino neighborhood, known as the Backside, where residents have frequently protested. Immigrants train horses for millionaires; hundreds of horse stable workers earn as a little as $400 a week and a place to sleep. This year’s protest will see teachers target Bevin. He has supported a “neighborhood schools” bill, which would largely defund bussing programs and emphasise schools that draw students from nearby neighborhoods instead of the whole area. Critics say this is re-segregation by stealth. With control over Jefferson county schools firmly in the hands of a panel of state education commissioners appointed by the governor, activists say Bevin will likely get his opportunity to smash a school busing program that has won national praise. “The governor has had it for Louisville since he was elected because we did not vote for him,” said Scott. “His ego has gotten the best of him. He has had it out for Louisville, and part of the way in which you attack Louisville is through its school system, which educates 101,000 students and is most diverse body of students [in the state]. That diversity scares and threatens the governor because that’s not something he’s comfortable with and respects or values.” Activists also worry that the Republican administration could threaten Jefferson county’s sanctuary schools program, which allows migrant children to attend regardless of the state of their documentation. Bevin claims he is taking over the school system because of financial mismanagement he blames on the locally elected school board’s relationship with teachers’ unions. “This is political,” Bevin told the Louisville Courier-Journal. “And it’s about power. And it’s about money. And it’s about union dues. And it’s about who gets to elect – and if people don’t think the teachers’ union has elected the school board in Jefferson county they haven’t been paying attention.” Activists say that if Bevin was serious about helping fund Louisville schools, he would start by eliminating tax breaks for horse racing and bourbon industries. Both are major political players in Kentucky: horse racing and associated business brings in more than $4bn a year while bourbon brings in more than $8.5bn. The precise value of tax breaks to bourbon and horses is unclear, but an analysis provided by Scott’s office showed that it deprives the state of tens of millions of dollars a year. “It’s a shame,” said teachers’ union activist Erin Vachon. “The Churchill Downs is a corporation, the bourbon industry is full of corporations, and they have an obligation to make wealth trickle down. We haven’t seen that.” The Jefferson county school board and the union intend to fight the governor’s takeover in court. If they don’t win there, Scott feels optimistic support for teachers and their unions will win back the state legislature in November. “We’ve got a historic number of women running for office, and a historic number of people of color running,” she said. “Intersectional organizing is powerful and this election is going to be a referendum on the attacks on education by the governor and his Republican supermajority.” This piece was amended on 5 May 2018. Due to a transcription error, it misidentified a source. The correct name, Erin Vachon, has been included.
19||Junot Díaz withdraws from Sydney Writers' festival following sexual harassment allegationsThe acclaimed Dominican American novelist Junot Díaz has been feted for his powerful literary expression of the pain of sexual violence. In 2008 he was awarded the Pulitzer prize for his book The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, the story of a young boy growing up amid abuse in New Jersey, and last month he was widely applauded for writing a confessional essay about being raped when he was eight years old. But this weekend Díaz has cancelled his scheduled appearances at the Sydney Writers’ festival following a public accusation of sexually inappropriate behaviour. Díaz, 49, was confronted with the claims by the writer Zinzi Clemmons both during a festival event and on Twitter. “As a grad student, I invited Junot Díaz to speak to a workshop on issues of representation in literature,” Clemmons tweeted on Friday. “I was an unknown wide-eyed 26-year-old, and he used it as an opportunity to corner and forcibly kiss me. I’m far from the only one he’s done this to. I refuse to be silent any more.” On Saturday morning the festival confirmed that Díaz had withdrawn from his remaining sessions. He is thought to have left Australia soon afterwards. A panel discussion entitled The Politics of Empathy that Díaz had been due to take part in later in the day was cancelled. “Sydney Writers’ festival is a platform for the sharing of powerful stories: urgent, necessary and sometimes difficult,” the festival said in a statement. “Such conversations have never been more timely. We remain committed to ensuring they occur in a supportive and safe environment for our authors and audiences.” Clemmons followed up her accusation with a further tweet in which she wrote: “I told several people this story at the time … I have emails he sent me afterward.” Clemmons confronted Díaz about his alleged behaviour during a public question-and-answer session on Friday, asking why his recent essay in the New Yorker had not said more about his own bad conduct. The panel moderator Ashley Hay apologised to Díaz, attempting to defuse the situation, and Clemmons left the theatre. After Clemmons’ tweets appeared on Friday night, two other women wrote publicly about encounters with Díaz. Carmen Maria Machado, a 2017 National Book Award finalist also attending the Sydney festival, tweeted that he had angrily rounded on her in public when she questioned the “pathological” attitude to women of one of his characters. In a thread of tweets that followed, Machado said Díaz “has treated women horrifically in every way possible”. On Friday another writer, Monica Byrne, wrote in a Facebook post that she experienced a “verbal sexual assault” at the hands of Díaz at a literary festival in 2014, adding she had “never experienced such virulent misogyny in my adult life”. The author’s New Yorker essay, The Silence, told of his own childhood rape experience at the hands of “a grown-up that [he] truly trusted”. “After he raped me, he told me I had to return the next day or I would be ‘in trouble’,” Díaz wrote, adding: “And because I was terrified, and confused, I went back the next day and was raped again. I never told anyone what happened, but today I’m telling you. And anyone else who cares to listen.” In the essay Díaz addresses a reader who once asked him if had been sexually abused. At the time, the author did not reply, but his New Yorker confession goes on to explain his belief that the abuse he endured as a child led him to mistreat women in adult life. “I think about the hurt I caused,” he wrote. Díaz responded to the accusations about his behaviour in a statement made to the New York Times on Friday. “I take responsibility for my past,” he said. “That is the reason I made the decision to tell the truth of my rape and its damaging aftermath. This conversation is important and must continue. I am listening to and learning from women’s stories in this essential and overdue cultural movement. We must continue to teach all men about consent and boundaries.” A Melbourne venue has confirmed that Díaz will no longer appear there tomorrow following the cancellation of the rest of his tour of the country.
15||Macron’s reforming zeal will be a test of France’s appetite for change‘The left and the right don’t know how to respond to President Macron’s reform agenda,” said a former senior trade union official. “What he’s doing doesn’t fit with the way we think about politics. It’s not like the third-way politics championed by Tony Blair. “It is based on empowerment of the individual – which threatens the left – and on the deployment of the state to invest and drive through reforms – which upsets the right. Neither has found a language or an alternative agenda with which to confront him.” Tomorrow, France’s prime minister, Édouard Philippe, will meet trade union leaders in an attempt to defuse a row that is seen as an important test of France’s appetite for change. Plans to strip train drivers of their many privileges, including retirement at 52, were backed by France’s lower house of parliament earlier this year, which set MPs on a collision course with one of the most powerful blocs of workers in Europe. Strikes began last month and are set to run until July in a bid to force a U-turn. President Emmanuel Macron, 40, has said he will pursue the reforms “to the end”, and polls say most French voters are behind him. An Ifop poll last week found that only 41% of French people consider the train drivers’ industrial action justified, a drop on a survey the previous week. Other polls have suggested the same, but some with a closer margin for and against. Yet there is anger across the spectrum about the speed at which changes are being implemented, and the implications for European Union elections next year and local elections in 2020, now that Marine Le Pen’s Front National has become a mainstream protest vehicle. The shake-up of pension arrangements for state rail operator SNCF affects almost 200,000 employees. According to Macron’s manifesto, that is just the start. He has plans to fold 40-odd employer and state pension schemes into one, potentially asking millions to give up benefits and privileges negotiated over many decades. Alain Duhamel, a political commentator, said Macron had “taken a great risk by starting with a whole series of reforms which weren’t popular even before this social turnaround”. He told RTL radio: “What’s at stake is the metamorphosis of SNCF, a national company that is the most symbolic in France.” The president, he added, had to avoid a “coagulation of conflicts”. This “coagulation” has been a recurrent fear among French governments since the riots of May 1968. Georgina Wright of the Chatham House thinktank said Macron feared his powers might evaporate quickly were the coalition he formed from his fledgling party and mainly right-of-centre rivals to break apart. “His majority in the lower house is just 23. So he has pushed hard while the majority is still in place. He also needs to deliver on some of his pledges and see results quickly. For instance he wants to cut 50,000 public sector jobs in his first term, but critics have been quick to point out that only 1,600 have gone so far, and many of those were contracts, not full-time posts.” One example of the way Macron has confused opponents is the legislation passed in January that allows citizens the “right to make a mistake” when dealing with the state without being sanctioned. Only one error is allowed and it must be made “in good faith”, but the intent is to push back against bureaucratic control. Businesses and individuals have long complained about the unresponsive French state. “It’s impossible to get a state worker on the phone, and when you do, they just say non,” an unnamed official said last week. This droit à l’erreur is viewed as a gimmick by some, but to Macron it is the cornerstone of a wider attempt to foster a “trusting society” and simplify bureaucracy. Government departments are seen as sclerotic institutions that don’t talk to each other and are staffed by blinkered civil servants who, unlike their British counterparts, rarely change departments. This may smack in some ways of Blairism, and there are similarities in Macron’s urge to support entrepreneurs with tax cuts and a more flexible labour market. He also wants to open up higher education and push some of France’s moribund universities into international rankings dominated by US and UK institutions. Chloë Morin, director of the Opinion Observatory at left-leaning thinktank the Jean Jaurès Foundation, said opinion polls showed Macron’s support wavering in some income groups: “The more people earn, the higher the support for Macron. This shows a polarisation of French society in terms of opinion.” Morin argues that Macron is in danger of being seen as “unfair”, not so much because of his attack on SNCF workers, but more in his wealth tax and pension reforms. “There’s a sense that it benefits exclusively the rich, but also criticism of the method, a sense that he is inflexible, rigid and doesn’t listen. We are hearing this more and more: that he doesn’t listen but is set on imposing his model.” The SNCF dispute has been contagious, sparking industrial action at Air France and among refuse collectors, hospital workers and teachers. Only 8% of France’s workforce is unionised, but the unions – especially the Conféderation Générale du Travail (CGT) – punch above their weight. What’s worse for the president is that the left likens him not to Tony Blair, but to Margaret Thatcher, a despised figure in France. Alexis Corbière, of leftist party La France Insoumise (France Unbowed), said the government’s response to the SNCF crisis had a Thatcherite feel: “He’s a bit Margaret Macron … there’s a certain contempt for union organisations and the train drivers.” He said the striking drivers were “heroes fighting for a public service”. Former Socialist president François Hollande accused Macron of hitting the poor while helping the rich. “This deepening inequality is a major problem … My governments reduced inequalities; this one is increasing them.” Even some who support the SNCF reforms are critical of Macron. Laurence Sailliet of the centre-right Les Républicains said: “The method is bad: there’s a lot of arrogance from the president … and from members of the government who keep playing the big guns and haven’t realised that the unions can be a blocking force.” Speaking to journalists before a meeting with the prime minister tomorrow, Laurent Berger, head of France’s other large union, the CFDT, said: “I hope he will listen to us. The solution to the conflict is first of all that the trains begin rolling normally again but also that the drivers don’t feel humiliated. We don’t need people showing their muscle, but people who will discuss the real issues.” The moderate CFDT has overtaken the leftist CGT in recent years to become France’s biggest union by member numbers. For Macron, the sense that old-style radicalism – represented by the CGT, with its tyre burning and secondary picketing – is dying, is hugely helpful. The former union official summed it up: “French people are ready to make sacrifices if they think their children’s future will be improved. As long as unemployment keeps falling, job opportunities increase and the extra funds for education and training make a difference, he has a good chance of deflecting claims that he’s a president for the rich.” Five things Macron wants to change Taxation Macron’s reputation as a president for the rich was burnished by the cut in wealth tax pushed through last year and effective from January. A tax introduced in the 1980s on savings, investment and property was limited by Macron to just property. Like its predecessor, the tax has a sliding scale from 0.5% annual surcharge on real estate worth €1.3m to 1.5% on properties worth more than £10m. Revenues to the government are expected to fall from €5bn to €2bn. But the plan is also about mimicking the UK by consolidating several charges on savings and investments into one capital gains tax at 30% (the UK’s non-property CGT is 20%). Copying the trend across the developed world, corporation tax, currently 15% on profits of €38,120, 28% up to €75,000 and 33.3% on above €75,000, will by 2020 apply to all firms at a rate of 28% before falling to 25% in 2022 (the UK is due to cut the current 19% rate to 18% in 2020). Union power Nothing in Macron’s plans comes near the anti-union legislation brought in by Margaret Thatcher during the 1980s. But big unions such as the CGT dislike new rules allowing workers in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to negotiate their own agreements. The government says 96% of SMEs do not have union reps. Firms with 11-50 staff can strike a deal with a non-unionised rep. Firms with fewer than 20 employees can organise a referendum, though changes to terms and conditions will need a two-thirds majority. To end the lottery of compensation claims for unfair dismissal, Macron will set a mandatory sliding scale for damages, from three months’ salary after two years of service to 20 months’ salary after 30 years. Appeals must be lodged within a year rather than two. Business regulations When a company hires its 50th employee, it faces a series of obligations, including the nomination of workers’ representatives to a works council and a health and safety committee. Under proposed changes, the three groups will be folded into a single social and economic committee, though separate health and safety committees will remain in high-risk sectors. Short-term job contracts A large underbelly of France’s workforce is on short-term contracts, which are routinely renewed. This helps employers avoid the protections offered by long-term contracts, which include a 35-hour working week. Macron wants to move away from this to industry-based rules set by representatives from each sector. The government hopes that incentives to work beyond 35 hours, which are much used already, and reformed dismissal terms will make the system more flexible. Public finances Macron needs to finance his reforms and has signalled to Brussels that he may bust budget spending limits in the short term. A version of austerity-lite has shaved a few euros from student benefits and capped rises in some welfare schemes. But even a modest proposal such as cutting 150,000 civil servants from the 5.3 million total has been met with resistance.
15||A new reality: could VR revive the amusement arcade?The rise of the gaming console has left its mark on living rooms and bedrooms around Britain – but it has also hit the high street. There were around 1,000 amusement arcades in the UK in the 1980s, but that number had halved by 2011, according to the amusements industry trade body, Bacta. Now, the next generation of gaming – virtual reality – is once again making the arcade the prime venue for playing cutting-edge games. Back at the inception of gaming, fans went to video-game arcades. Japanese coin-operated games like Out Run and Street Fighter managed to draw in players once Pac-Man and Donkey Kong fell away, but they could not beat increasingly impressive home consoles such as Sony’s PlayStation, which came along in the mid-90s, and Microsoft’s Xbox at the turn of the century. Seaside arcades have clung on as “family entertainment centres” or “mixed entertainment facilities”, full of games aimed at small children alongside rides and attractions. However, VR Star in Bristol is one of several hundred virtual reality arcades around the UK that are persuading gamers to quit their homes for the high street. They mirror a global trend for dedicated “VRcades” springing up in the US, Japan, South Korea and China. With 380 such dedicated venues now operating around the world, could VR offer the arcade a route back in the shape of so-called “destination gaming”? While it’s possible to buy budget technology, good quality VR is expensive. HTC’s Vive headset is available for around £599 in the UK, but to function effectively it requires a computer with serious processing power and a high quality graphics card, raising the bar to thousands of pounds. Even then you’re not tapping the full potential of VR gaming. The driving simulators and shoot-em-ups in VR Star Bristol are further brought to life with motion sensors and high-quality sound, taking the experience to another level. The 360-degree visuals and depth of field take on another dimension when paired with hydraulics and tilting floors. LA-based Dreamscape Immersive’s Alien Zoo experience even uses wind machines to add to the sensation of movement. “To get the full experience, VR needs what we call SiSoMo: sight, sound and motion,” says Martin Higginson, the executive chairman of British developer Immotion, which owns VR Star. “If you want a truly immersive experience you need high-end components, and for that reason VR will be an out-of-home experience for some years. I’ve spent most of my life in digital media and it is the most exciting thing yet.” Situated in a modest space in Cabot Circus shopping centre, VR Star was launched to test the waters in mid-December. By the beginning of March, it had admitted 4,000 customers, paying £30 an hour. The enthusiastic response has encouraged the company to open four more venues in Swindon, Cardiff, Manchester and Leeds. A total of 60 VR Stars are planned around the country, along with units in existing arcades and custom-made rides for brands such as Legoland. Just before Christmas, Immotion announced a £1.3m investment to launch its platforms in Europe and the US. The units in VR Star play games from a Chinese developer but Immotion intends to run its own titles following last year’s acquisition of Studio Liddell, a Manchester-based animation producer. “What you see and experience currently is like the early days of computer gaming,” says Higginson. “It’s going to improve rapidly. Those games are 2K [screen resolution] but very soon we will be running 4K with faster processing and better rendering. We will take you on Jurassic rides or helicopter you over the Serengeti and it will blow you away.” Experts say VR has come at the right time for the arcade business. “Arcades have always had lifecycles reflecting changing innovation,” says Devi Kolli, the head of VR equipment firm AiSolve. “They can’t survive the way they are without reinventing themselves with cutting-edge technology, and we are part of that. The response to VR so far suggests the market is hungry for good products.” If they are prepared to invest in the new generation of VR, existing arcades could enjoy a return to prominence as gaming destinations, though they will have to compete with dedicated spaces like VR Star. Jeremy Dalton, a VR consultant at PwC, is more positive. He says the complexity of setting up VR experiences offers an ideal chance for arcades. “The set-up issues with VR provides a perfect opportunity for third parties ... and that’s gaming arcades. You just hand over your money and enjoy the ride.”
13||Stoke City 1-2 Crystal Palace: Premier League – as it happenedAnd that’s your lot. Commiserations to Stoke City, whose ten-year stay in the Premier League ended this afternoon. The last time they slipped out of the top flight, in the mid Eighties, it took them 23 years to get back. Here’s wishing them a speedier recovery this time round. Meanwhile congratulations to Crystal Palace, who have stayed up with ease, no mean feat after their appalling start to the season. That seven-game losing streak seems an awfully long time ago now! And now a downbeat Paul Lambert. “It’s a tough afternoon, and I feel for everybody connected with the club. The season starts in July, August. You find yourself sleepwalking into situations, and we just never had enough. We just fell short. I came here in January. We tried to identify and rectify what was going wrong, and I can’t fault anyone’s effort, but we didn’t have enough up front and that eventually caught up with us. This is a brilliant football club. It will be difficult, but we have to man up. It is tough at the minute, but the club is in a good position to rebuild. We’ll sit down and regroup, it’s in really good hands, with a marvellous support base. It’s an opportunity to rebuild.” Roy Hodgson reflects on Palace’s survival and Stoke’s demise. “The players deserve all the credit. They came out of the blocks, and asked a lot of questions of our back four. They stopped us playing football. I’m proud in the second half we showed more courage and got the ball down better. Perhaps their taking the lead meant they had something to hold onto and so they dropped deeper. But I’m proud of my team’s performance, not just today but over the whole of the season. I feel a lot of sympathy and empathy for Stoke, it’s a very tough day, so any joy I feel is measured by looking at the faces of those players who gave everything they could give. But they came across a team who were not prepared to lie down. It’s nice to get over 40 points, and we’ll try to get a place in the top ten, but if they can’t do it they won’t get any criticisms from me!” Our man Nick Miller was at the Bet 365 Stadium this afternoon. Here’s his report on the shattering of dreams in the Potteries. There’s nice. Ryan Shawcross reflects. “It didn’t happen over one game. We’ve not been good enough all season. The fans were brilliant, even at the end. They were still cheering us on, which shows their dedication. We’ve had a right go, but for whatever reason we’ve not got the goals we needed and that’s cost us. The last goal was my fault, and I hold my hands up. But we will be back. The club have got a lot of big decisions to make. If we keep our players - and we’ve got a good manager - we’ll be back and hopefully will come back strong.” So to confirm, Stoke are the first team to be relegated from the Premier League this season. Bottom club West Brom can still save themselves, though they’ll need to start by beating high-flying Tottenham in the 3pm kick-offs. Roy Hodgson, who has experienced some tough times of his own over the years, makes sure not to rub it in when he shakes hands with Paul Lambert. A grim, apologetic face as he offers commiserations to his opposite number. It’s a small thing, but a classy touch, especially as Palace have completed their own escape today. Jack Butland is in floods of tears as he claps the Stoke support, who never stopped believing ... well, for 86 minutes, anyway. The bittersweet love is returned by a large crowd who have stayed behind to thank their team, despite it all. Xherdan Shaqiri, who had given Stoke hope with his first-half free kick, simply looks stunned. That’s it, all over for Stoke City. They’re relegated after a ten-year stay in the Premier League. Crystal Palace’s win ensures the survival of the south Londonders. 90 min +4: Shaqiri makes a little space down the left for a cross. Shawcross, desperate to make amends, sends a header softly over the bar. 90 min +3: Benteke twists and turns in the Stoke box, but can’t shoot or win a penalty. 90 min +2: Palace play the corner backwards, then hold onto the ball awhile. Their fans give it the olé!s, which is really adding insult to injury. 90 min +1: Benteke barrels down the left and earns a corner off Bauer. 90 min: Five extra minutes. Five minutes to save Stoke City’s Premier League life. 89 min: Shaqiri is booked for an appalling rake down the back of Loftus-Cheek’s leg. He should be sent packing. Loftus-Cheek is in a lot of pain. 88 min: That goal will also confirm Palace’s continued membership of the Premier League. Townsend is repalced by Schlupp. The Stoke fans are beginning to make their way home, the jig nearly up. Benteke plays the ball wide right for Zaha, who looks to deliver it back into the centre for Van Aanholt. Shawcross tries to intercept ... and manages only to take the pace off the ball and tee it up for Van Aanholt. The Palace defender takes a stride and slams the ball under Butland and into the net. Is it the goal that relegates Stoke City after their ten-year stay in the Premier League? 85 min: Pieters is booked for an earlier tug on Zaha. Then Sobhi twists, turns and earns Stoke’s first corner down the left. But the set piece is wasted. And then ... 84 min: Townsend and Zaha exchange crisp passes down the right, before releasing Loftus-Cheek, who tries the spectacular from a tight angle. Nope! Zaha was free in the middle, too, waiting for a tap-in. 83 min: Townsend dribbles with purpose down the left and earns Palace’s sixth corner of the afternoon off Allen. Nothing much comes of the set piece. Ndiaye then clatters into Loftus-Cheek. You usually see yellows for that leg-hanging clumsiness: he’s very lucky to still be on the park. 81 min: Ndiaye is booked for a late tackle on Townsend. 80 min: Benteke, dropping deep down the left, tries to return the favour. He’s close to finding Zaha with a fine diagonal pass. But there’s a little too much power in the pass, and it flies through to Butland. 79 min: Zaha finds Benteke inside the box from the right. Benteke can’t control, but the ball nearly squirms into the bottom right anyway. Stoke are living very dangerously now. 77 min: Campbell comes on for Johnson. An attacking substitution for Stoke, but within seconds they’re nearly losing, as Townsend breaks down the left and pulls the ball back for Zaha, who must surely bury it from the penalty spot. But he leans back and balloons a wild one deep into the stand. Stoke could see ten years of Premier League life flash before their eyes then. 76 min: Sakho plays an awful ball out of defence, allowing Ndiaye to intercept and attempt to slip Shaqiri free. Shaqiri is dozily flagged offside. 75 min: Townsend crosses low from the left. Benteke gets ahead of Pieters, but instead of flinging himself for the cross, opts to flop to the floor instead, looking for the penalty. The referee isn’t having it. 74 min: A free kick for Stoke out on the left. The home heroes load the box. Shaqiri hoicks long. Allen, of all people, rises highest to win a header at the far post. But he can only send it harmlessly over the bar. 72 min: Stoke’s nerves are beginning to betray them. From the Palace corner, the ball is worked to Zaha, 25 yards out down the right. Pieters comes through him. Free kick. Milivojevic curls deep. Tomkins should plant his head on the ball, on the left-hand corner of the six-yard box, but Diouf does just enough to put him off. 70 min: Stoke won’t be relegated if this match ends in a draw ... but they’ll be in all sorts of trouble, with Championship football next season more than likely. Accordingly, they press forwards. Shaqiri tries to find Zouma in the Palace box with a ball from the right. Nothing doing. Palace break, and they’re two on two! Fortunately for Stoke, Townsend overplays a bit, and nobody gets a shot away. But they do earn a corner on the right. Stoke ship yet another lead! Zaha romps through the middle of the park. He slips the ball to his left for Loftus-Cheek, who shuttles it on further. McArthur, on the overlap, slides the ball across Butland and into the bottom right! It had been coming. 67 min: Sobhi comes on for Crouch. 65 min: Milivojevic tries to get his head onto the free kick, but nothing significant occurs. Pieters clatters Zaha. Nerves are jangling now. This is all very edgy. 63 min: Bauer is booked for a fairly basic challenge on Zaha. Before the free kick can be taken, Benteke comes on for Cabaye, and there’s some playground shoving on the edge of the Stoke area. Johnson, 33, and Tomkins, 29, are booked. 61 min: Palace push Stoke back. But suddenly Stoke break out. Allen rolls a fine pass down the right to release Shaqiri into acres of space. The ball’s rolled inside for Diouf, who should power clear but can’t sort his feet out. Then Crouch tries to take up possession on the edge of the area, but he goes over instead of getting a shot away. What a chance to put some daylight between themselves and Palace! 60 min: Milivojevic chips the free kick over the Stoke back line, but Tomkins, coming in from the left, can’t stop the ball from going out for a goal kick. 59 min: Palace are well on top now. They’ve enjoyed 76% possession during the last ten minutes. Shawcross comes through the back of Townsend, 30 yards from the Stoke goal. Free kick, and a chance for Palace to load the box. 57 min: Zaha turns crisply down the left and slips a pass down the wing for Townsend. Townsend flashes the ball across the face of goal, where Zaha and Loftus-Cheek look to poke home, but the winger had gone early and is rightly flagged for offside. A totally unnecessary mistake, and Palace are currently burning chances to get back into this match. 56 min: ... a short-corner routine goes badly wrong. Van Aanholt tries to rescue the situation with a shot from distance, but his effort flies miles over the bar. 55 min: Milivojevic has a dig from 25 yards. The ball’s deflected wide left for a corner. From which ... 54 min: Shaqiri makes to chip the ball past Milivojevic, who raises an arm to block it. The Palace midfielder is booked for deliberate handball. 53 min: Allen tries to release Shaqiri down the right, but there’s too much juice on the ball. 51 min: We go again. Sakho and Crouch tussle under a high ball. Crouch is penalised for being overly aggressive. He’s got Sakho’s face in his hand at one point, as he shoves him backwards to the ground. He’s very lucky not to see yellow. Some referees, on a hair-trigger, might even have flashed red. An unnecessary risk, given the predicament his team is in. 50 min: So much for that lively start: Zouma spends a couple of minutes getting treatment. 48 min: Palace string together some pretty triangles in the middle of the park. Suddenly Cabaye slips one down the left channel for Loftus-Cheek, whose shot from the edge of the area is stopped by a sliding Pieters. The ball ricochets off Loftus-Cheek and out for a goal kick; it hasn’t been his day so far. But Palace nearly sliced Stoke open there. A lively start to the half. 47 min: Shawcross lifts the ball long. Crouch, on the edge of the D, heads on to Diouf, who has his back to goal but a chance to flick Shaqiri free to his right. The flick doesn’t quite come off, but that was a sweet move, proof that long-ball football can be beautiful too. It would have been a fine goal. We’re off again! Stoke get the party restarted. No half-time changes. Half-time reading: It’s the Women’s FA Cup Final later today. We’ll be covering it here, so get up to speed with Louise Taylor’s preview of the big Wembley showdown between Chelsea and cup specialists Arsenal. See you at 5.30pm for that one! Stoke haven’t been particularly coherent. But Xherdan Shaqiri, with a little help from Ruben Loftus-Cheek, has given them a precious half-time lead. As things stand, their survival bid remains a live prospect! 45 min +4: Ndiaye’s back up. 45 min +2: Zaha dribbles down the left, momentarily bothering Stoke. Then Kelly tries to find someone in the middle from a position out right. Ndiaye sticks out a leg to block and takes a sore whack. He’s down getting treatment. 45 min +1: That goal has given Stoke a huge lift, as you’d expect. Pieters launches into the Palace box. Shawcross is causing the visitors concern. Hennessey just about deals with the situation. 45 min: Loftus-Cheek played a big part in Palace’s downfall there. He tries to make amends immediately, chesting down a Townsend cross from the right. But he can’t sort his feet out, ten yards from goal, and Stoke clear. There will be four added minutes of this intriguing half. 44 min: Stoke haven’t been very good. But that was a delicious free kick. And the stadium explodes into life! Shaqiri and Lambert cavort on the touchline accordingly. Shaqiri curls the free kick into the top right! The ball took a little deflection off the eyebrows of Loftus-Cheek, sending it right into the corner. Hennessey would have had little chance of saving Shaqiri’s effort anyway, but that deflection definitely took it out of his reach! 42 min: Loftus-Cheek tries to break upfield from deep. Allen robs him and feeds Shaqiri, who is upended by Loftus-Cheek. A free kick, just to the right of the Palace D. One for Shaqiri, who springs up in excitable fashion with a view to taking the set piece. 40 min: Ward, injured earlier, can’t continue. Kelly comes on as he limps off. 38 min: Ward dallies over a throw. Oh, it’s not Palace’s! He takes his own sweet time to give the ball back to Bauer, who has steam coming out of his ears. Palace are pressing Stoke’s buttons this afternoon. The crowd respond accordingly. Magnificent pantomime. 36 min: After Zaha is bollocked by the referee for moaning about the minor incident with Johnson, Palace work their corner in from the left. Cabaye tries to fire a spectacular one into the top right from the left of the D. The effort just about stays inside the stadium. 35 min: Zaha, fuelled by righteous ire, swans past Shawcross in the middle of the park. He slides a pass down the inside-left channel for Townsend, who very nearly breaks clear on goal, but makes do with winning a corner off Zouma. 34 min: Zaha threatens to burst down the inside-left channel, but Johnson eases him off the ball. Zaha sits on the turf, glowering. Johnson wanders off. 32 min: Palace work the ball to the right wing. A cross. Cabaye loops a header goalwards from the edge of the box, but it flies harmlessly over and Butland has it covered anyway. 31 min: ... Van Aanholt volleys from the edge of the area. Johnson closes him down. His block leads to another corner on the left. 30 min: Stoke press Palace back a little. Johnson nearly finds Diouf in the middle from the right. Pieters crosses from the left, but Crouch heads across goal instead of going for it. Palace then break up the other end and earn a corner. From which ... 29 min: Pieters is back up. But this stuttering action isn’t helping Stoke, who need to keep press, press, pressing in search of that precious win. Johnson tries to get things going again with a run down the right, but his cross towards Crouch is easily cleared. 27 min: This is stop-start. Now Pieters is down, having taken a whack on the kneecap from McArthur, who was attempting to boot the ball at the time. Ooyah, oof. A sore one. 26 min: Ward’s back on. Loud boos as he takes possession of the ball, then offloads it. But he’s moving a bit gingerly at the moment. 25 min: Ward is down getting some treatment. The crowd think he’s trying it on, of course they do, but close-ups suggest the full-back is struggling a bit. He limps off with the physio, and for now Palace are down to ten men. 24 min: That move has given Stoke succour. Shaqiri spreads the play to the left. Bauer hoicks a cross into the mixer. Crouch rises with Hennessey, and fouls the keeper, but for the first time in the match, Palace are looking a little unsettled. 22 min: Stoke finally put something together, and it’s the best chance of the game. Shaqiri opens his legs and romps down the right. He curls into the centre, finding Diouf six yards out. Diouf tries to guide a downward header into the bottom left, and though it bounces wide it’s not too far away. Some promise for the desperate hosts. 20 min: It continues to be scrappy. Stoke can’t get anything going at all. Pieters rakes a long pass forward out for a goal kick. That was nowhere near a team-mate. The stadium has fallen a little quiet. 17 min: On the touchline, Lambert loses his rag over a throw-in near the halfway line. Passions are running high. Stoke are a collective study in agitation right now. 15 min: Palace start stroking it about patiently. They’re slowly beginning to dictate terms, some control amid the mayhem. The ball’s worked to Zaha on the right. Zaha fires across goal and left of the target. Not far away. 13 min: Now Cabaye stays down after being clipped by Crouch. The big man offers a hand of friendship, but an irritated Cabaye refuses it. The Stoke faithful give him the bird. A pattern developing here. 12 min: Palace are taking their time over throw-ins, trying to take the sting out of Stoke’s early play. A ploy straight out of the Mourinho-at-Anfield ‘14 playbook. Clever Roy. The crowd don’t like it much. 10 min: Townsend zips down the right and cuts into the centre. He shoots low for the goal, from the edge of the Stoke box, but his effort is blocked bravely by Pieters. Both teams are attacking with purpose, though Palace’s moves look a little more measured, smoother, less hysterical. 9 min: Bauer powers down the left and reaches the byline. He looks for Crouch in the middle, but his low cross is snaffled by Hennessey. 8 min: Bauer races down the right, after a long ball. For a second, it looks like he’ll reach it, and move menacingly towards goal, but he can’t quite reach. Then Palace go straight up the other end, Loftus-Cheek drifting in from the left and curling a magnificent effort inches wide of the top-right corner. That would have been a picture-book goal ... but not quite. 6 min: Allen bursts down the Stoke left. He’s dispossessed. Zaha races along the Palace right, to little effect. We’re up to 110mph. 4 min: Butland blooters long. Crouch rises above Tomkins, and concedes a free kick. This is all very intense. Shapeless and unpredictable, with passes at a premium. It’s like a Champions League semi-final. 2 min: And now Crouch is caught offside, chasing a Diouf flick-on. This is being played at 100mph at the moment. What a hectic, end-to-end start. What an atmosphere! And we’re off! Palace get the ball rolling. Or, more accurately, bouncing around hysterically in the middle of the park. But then some order, as Townsend breaks down the left and feeds Loftus-Cheek on his inside. Loftus-Cheek tries to feed the ball forward down the channel for Zaha, but the pass is too strong. Goal kick. The teams are out! Stoke City are in their famous red-and-white stripes, while Palace play in their black change strip. It’s a sunny day in the Potteries; the atmosphere at the Bet 365 Stadium is blistering. As it almost always is, rain or shine, mid-table irrelevance or relegation battle. Two clubs with supporters who really know how to whip up a beautiful noise. This is magnificent. A quick blast of Delilah and then we’ll be off! Some pre-match praise for the Hodge, courtesy of Felix Wood. “Palace under Hodgson have become good to watch and have pulled themselves out of free-fall, with an injury list that others would have hidden behind. I hope that posterity remembers Hodgson not as the man who had Kane on corner duty but as someone who consistently made small clubs and unfashionable players punch above their weight. And also for any young players coming through, Zaha and Loftus-Cheek’s experience this season will attest to the fact that a team that will play you and a manager that will allow you to achieve is better than being squashed at one of the mega-clubs.” Paul Lambert talks! “We have to try and win, throw everything at it. We have 90 minutes to do it, so we can’t go at it from the off, but the intent is there. We can’t attack for 90 minutes, it’s impossible. But if we win today, we’re right back in it. We’ve lacked in forward areas, that’s evident, we don’t have the personnel. But hopefully someone will create something and we’ll get a goal. Palace won’t take their foot off the gas, we have to be ready for that, and be on the front foot. The crowd will be right for us, and drive us on. We just need a break, and play well to win.” Roy Hodgson speaks to Sky. “I hope we have the same mindset we’ve had all season. I’m really hoping it won’t change at all. We want to play as well as we possibly can to the end of the season, not least because of the integrity of the league, and it’s a mistake when teams switch off. We’re not going to switch off. If we lose, it’s because Stoke will have played better than us. When you play against a team that is going to be as motivated and fired up as they’re going to be, it’s always going to be a problem for you. What’s more, they have very good players. We have prepared the players, but now it’s all about the actors on the field. We’re aware it’s last-chance saloon time for Stoke.” If It Ain’t Broke I: Stoke City earned a commendable point at Liverpool this time last weekend, so the one and only change to their starting XI is enforced. The injured Bruno Martins Indi is replaced by Glen Johnson. If It Ain’t Broke II: Crystal Palace won 5-0 last weekend. They’ve named the same team. Stoke City: Butland, Johnson, Shawcross, Zouma, Pieters, Shaqiri, Allen, Ndiaye, Bauer, Diouf, Crouch. Subs: Ireland, Adam, Cameron, Fletcher, Haugaard, Sobhi, Campbell. Crystal Palace: Hennessey, Ward, Tomkins, Sakho, Van Aanholt, McArthur, Milivojevic, Cabaye, Loftus-Cheek, Townsend, Zaha. Subs: Sorloth, Lee, Schlupp, Cavalieri, Benteke, Wan Bissaka, Kelly. Referee: Martin Atkinson (W Yorkshire). If Stoke City win their last two games of the season, there’s a reasonable chance of their staying up. It’s not beyond the realms: they just need two from Southampton, Swansea, Huddersfield and West Ham to end the season in miserable fashion, while winning their own matches today against Crystal Palace and next weekend at Swansea. On the face of it, far from an impossible dream. The only small problem: they’ve only won one of their last 18 games, and only scored four times in their last eight. Gritty points at Anfield are all good and well, but now they’ve got to start winning. Can they complete stage one of this great escape against Palace? Well, Roy Hodgson’s side aren’t yet mathematically safe ... but come on. So there’s a slight chance they might not be matching Paul Lambert’s men for desperate intensity this afternoon. And Stoke did beat Palace the last time these teams met in the Potteries. But to balance all that out: Palace are four unbeaten, have just completed a 5-0 thrashing of 2015/16 champions Leicester, and have won six of the last seven against Stoke. Whatever: Stoke need to win their first game since January 20. If they don’t, they’re as good as down; a point today might not be enough to retain hope, depending on other results. A loss and they’re gone. It’s the relegation precipice. It’s the last-chance saloon. It’s the final roll of the dice. It’s on! Kick off: 12.30pm BST.
17||Some children reach brink of suicide before getting help with mental health, charity warnsBritain is confronting a mental health crisis because resources for children are so stretched that some only receive help if they seriously self-harm or attempt suicide, Barnardo’s has warned. Javed Khan, chief executive of Britain’s largest children’s charity, said that young people’s mental health had never been worse in the organisation’s 152-year history. Radical action was needed, he said, because funding cuts had forced charities to abandon vital services. “It’s never been as bad, and in another five years’ time it’s going to be even more complex,” Khan told the Observer. “This mental health crisis is getting more severe and more difficult by the day. The numbers keep going up. Educational psychologists are pulling their hair out – they haven’t got the resources. They can’t respond as fast as they need to. “We are going to regret this period if this goes on for too long. We are going to rue the day when we took our eye off the ball.” Neera Sharma, assistant director of policy at Barnardo’s, said that in some parts of the country the pressure on resources was so severe that only the most extreme cases received help. “The threshold is suicidal in some cases; the child would have had to have attempted suicide or committed serious self-harm to get a response,” Sharma said. Speaking before Barnardo’s annual lecture this Wednesday, where representatives of Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, will be among the audience, Khan urged the government to adopt a dramatic new approach. The lack of resources has forced the charity to walk away from a number of contracts during the past year because the money available to local authorities meant it could not offer a sufficient service, Khan said. “They are tightening their belt to a point they cannot tighten it any more. They are asking for more to be delivered for far less resources than ever before, and there is a tipping point where you just can’t deliver a safe, high-quality service,” said Khan, who is also a member of the advisory board for the children’s commissioner for England. One way the government could save money would be to scrap the traditional tendering process in favour of a more collaborative approach between the state and charities: “I don’t think the tendering model is sustainable – there aren’t enough resources in the system,” said Khan. The latest on the UK’s mental health problem emerged on Thursday when statistics showed that almost one in five children could be at risk of having mental health issues later in life, according to the study of more than 850,000 seven-to-14-year-olds. Figures from NHS trusts in England in November revealed that 60% of children and young people referred for specialist care by their GP were not receiving treatment. In December the government published a green paper on mental health problems but Khan said that the plans lacked ambition, falling significantly short of what he felt was required. “If you analyse it, then three-quarters of children are going to get no support,” he said. “The response is insufficient, it’s not broad enough, there is limited financial detail. It talks about rolling out a number of initiatives in a number of areas but funding is only secured to these areas until 2023. The prime minister has talked about this issue as a burning injustice but we don’t think the action is matching the rhetoric.” Last month Hunt intervened in the debate to condemn social media companies for “turning a blind eye” to mental health damage suffered by children who have uncontrolled access to their online platform. Khan said social media was an issue – comparing new technology to “allowing a film crew into the bedroom” – and that they were also liaising directly with companies such as Google and Facebook to limit potential harm to young people. • In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org
13||Stoke relegated from Premier League after Van Aanholt strikes for PalaceExactly a decade ago on Friday Stoke City won promotion to the Premier League with a tense draw against Leicester City. Their 10-season spell in the top flight is now over, after defeat at home to Crystal Palace confirmed their relegation. At full-time they remained only three points from the last safe spot with one game to play but Swansea face Southampton on Tuesday and so one of those teams’ tally will increase beyond what is available to Paul Lambert’s side. “I can’t put my thoughts into words so soon after the game,” said Lambert. “Emotions are up and down after a tough afternoon. I feel for everybody connected with the club.” Xherdan Shaqiri had given Stoke both the lead and a bit of hope but second-half goals from James McArthur and Patrick van Aanholt, combined with an anaemic home display in which Lambert’s players looked absolutely terrified of their fate, sent them down. This has, of course, been coming. The club left it too long to dismiss Mark Hughes, under whom the club had stagnated, waiting until January to make the change. It might have looked like deflecting blame, particularly as Stoke have won only one of Lambert’s 14 games in charge, but it is tricky to disagree with his assessment of their fate. “When you don’t start right, and don’t get the grip of it, then you end up in trouble,” he said. The atmosphere was tense from the start. The home fans did their best to intimidate, booing every slight delay of a Palace throw-in as if the taker had spat on the statue of Stanley Matthews that stands outside the ground. But that merely masked their nerves. It was a bitty game that neither team looked capable of getting hold of. Lambert spent most of his time doing shuttle runs along the edge of the technical area, jawing in the ear of the fourth official, his face turning a curious shade of puce – or, put another way, looking every inch the nervous manager. He was briefly calmed just before half-time. Shaqiri was fouled about 25 yards out, hitched his shorts up his vast thighs and whipped the free-kick into the goalkeeper’s top-left corner. It flicked off Ruben Loftus-Cheek, who had committed the foul, in the wall on the way in but nobody cared: Shaqiri skipped into Lambert’s arms and there was hope in the Potteries. Yet the problem with a struggling team going ahead is it can exacerbate nerves rather than cool them. That has been a theme of Stoke’s season. “It’s people being anxious, worried about what might happen when we’ve got the lead,” Lambert said. That anxiety manifested itself in Stoke’s defensive line dropping virtually on to Jack Butland’s toes, inviting Palace on. Stoke looked like a team trying to hold on for 45 minutes and, while Lambert has tightened their defence since arriving in January, it seemed a risky approach. So it turned out, although Palace’s equaliser came after one of Stoke’s few attacks. Wilfried Zaha led a counter and fed Loftus‑Cheek, who slipped in McArthur. Shoulders slumped around the stadium when he bobbled a shot home. The decisive moment came with four minutes left. Zaha played what was actually a terrible pass looking for Van Aanholt, which Ryan Shawcross looked to intercept but poked straight into the Dutch full-back’s path, and he slotted the ball beneath Butland. It was cruel, perhaps, that the final error came from the man who has been with Stoke since they came up to the top flight. The result also confirmed that Palace are safe. Roy Hodgson has done an extraordinary job since taking over a team that had not managed a goal or a point in their first four games, (and went three more in kind under him) but he tried to direct praise towards his backroom staff. “I suppose every orchestra has to have a band leader,” he eventually said, when pressed for a little less modesty. “I’m really proud of our team’s performance, not just today but over the whole season.” In some ways it might be the kindest thing that it is over now for Stoke. Even with a victory they might still have gone down this weekend, so at least this curtailed their pain. “It’s a chance for Stoke to rebuild,” said Lambert.
14||UK regulator orders Cambridge Analytica to release data on US voterCambridge Analytica has been ordered to hand over all the data and personal information it has on an American voter, including details of where it got the data and what it did with it, or face a criminal prosecution. The UK Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) served the enforcement notice to the company on Friday in a landmark legal decision that opens the way for up to 240 million other American voters to request their data back from the firm under British data protection laws. The test case was taken to the ICO by David Carroll, an associate professor at Parsons School of Design in New York. As a US citizen, he had no means of obtaining this information under US law, but in January 2016 he discovered Cambridge Analytica had processed US voter data in the UK and that this gave him rights under British laws. Cambridge Analytica had refused to accept this and told the ICO that Carroll was no more entitled to make a so-called “subject access request” under the UK Data Protection Act “than a member of the Taliban sitting in a cave in the remotest corner of Afghanistan”. The ICO did not accept this as a valid legal argument and has now told SCL Elections, which acted as the data controller for Cambridge Analytica, that it has 30 days to comply or appeal. Cambridge Analytica and its affiliates announced this week that they had gone into liquidation, but the ICO has made it clear that it cannot avoid its responsibilities under UK law and states that “failure to comply with this enforcement notice is a criminal offence”. Carroll said the decision was a landmark moment not just for him but for the millions of other people whose data Cambridge Analytica used in the Trump and other campaigns. “This should solve a lot of mysteries about what the company did with data and where it got it from,” he said. “I hope that it will help the ongoing investigations in my country and yours, and other places like Canada. There’s a lot of questions that no one has been able to answer until now so hopefully this will be a major breakthrough in our understanding of what it did.” He said the ICO’s letter was “pretty extraordinary” and “proved what we’ve been saying for a long time: this is not a normal company. To have the audacity to say that American voters are no different than jihadis hiding in a cave is pretty shocking”. He said that it was the fact that it was a British company that had processed US voters’ data in the UK in an act of “digital colonialism” that had originally inspired him to ask the company for his data back. He went public in an interview with the Observer last year after Cambridge Analytica sent him a “profile” they had created about him but no information about how they created it: “They had given me ‘scores’ for different issues but I had no idea what they’d based this on.” Carroll is also pursuing his right to his data through the British courts, with his case due to be heard in the high court in the next few months. Ravi Naik, a human rights lawyer with Irvine Thanvi Natas, the British solicitor who is leading the case, said the decision “totally vindicates David’s long battle to try and reclaim his data”. He added: “The company put him through such a torturous process over what should have been a very simple subject access request. It was always astonishing to us that Cambridge Analytica and SCL took such a combative approach when the law is crystal clear. Data flows across borders, so the law follows.” The covering letter from the ICO says that if Cambridge Analytica has difficulties complying, it should hand over passwords for the servers seized during its raid on the company’s office – something that raises questions also about what it has managed to retrieve from the servers so far. Paul-Olivier Dehaye, a data expert who helped Carroll with his request, said that his website, PersonalData.io, had received a flood of inquiries from people who wanted to reclaim their data from Cambridge Analytica and other companies. “The data commissioner has said that data crimes are real crimes and she is now putting this into action. This would have been unimaginable a year ago. It’s a real landmark. The ICO is showing that they are real consequences to not complying with UK data laws.. “Cambridge Analytica has been able to evade journalists’ questions and mislead both parliament and Congress, but now if they don’t answer these questions, it shows they’re criminally liable. And there’s also the potential that the truth could be even more incriminating.” The company has claimed to have up to 7,000 data points on 240 million Americans, and if it refuses to comply with Carroll’s request or can be shown to have misused data, it could open itself up to class action from the entire US electorate – a fact that Dehaye suggests may have contributed to its decision this week to fold. Carroll, who has studied the modern “adtech” industry for his professional work, said that he didn’t expect to find his data had been harvested from Facebook “since I’ve always been pretty paranoid about my privacy settings”, but that he expected to find a whole host of other companies implicated. “I think we’re going to find that this goes way beyond Facebook and that all sorts of things are being inferred about us and then used for political purposes.” Cambridge Analytica has been approached for comment.
13||Melbourne Victory beat Newcastle Jets to win A-League grand final – as it happenedThere you have it, another A-League season done and dusted. Good luck figuring it all out when the team that finished fourth takes home the biggest prize, last year’s wooden spooners host the grand final and the most dominant side in the land contemplate an offseason of upheaval. The grand final itself was testament to Melbourne Victory’s fortitude. It was never a vintage season for them but to come past Adelaide United, Sydney FC and Newcastle Jets in the manner they did was an extraordinary accomplishment. I’m off to ice my fingers, rail against VAR and book Lawrence Thomas a ticket to Russia. Until next season, bye for now. Here’s Emma Kemp from Australian Associated Press’s take on a glorious night for Melbourne Victory. Kevin Muscat speaking to Fox Sports: The records are not something that motivates me. What motivates me is getting in each week and improving people. We had a massive challenge this season and this week it seemed the whole country wanted us to fall over.” Asked if he had a response to the boos he received midseason from Victory supporters, Muscat pointed to the packed stands of delirious fans, remarking, “I reckon they’re pretty happy now.” Ernie Merrick is understandably stony faced and furious. Unsurprisingly he takes aim at VAR. Expect more of the same in his official press conference. We Are The Champions reverberates around McDonald Jones Stadium as the Victory crew charge over to their pocket of supporters. Muscat is in the middle of everything, grinding his never-ending gum with a massive grin on his face, one he richly deserves. The actual raising of the trophy is missed by the TV cameras in a pretty dismal snafu. Victory’s players don’t care, they’re all jumping up and down in customary fashion. Melbourne Victory skipper Carl Valeri offers his commiserations to Newcastle, then thanks the sponsors, FFA, the state government, family and friends, supporters, coaching staff, office staff, and finally the players. “We stayed humble through the highs and ground it out in the lows.” Victory’s players are now receiving their championship medals, which are cute little mini toilet seats. Nigel Boogaard delivers a rousing speech as the defeated captain. After the congratulations to Victory the message is all about returning “bigger and better” next year. Excellent job. One of the easier decisions in the history of individual awards, Melbourne Victory’s keeper receives the Joe Marston medal. He looks practically mummified when he dips his head to accept the honour, bandages holding his jaw together and stemming bleeding on his forehead. Presentation time now, led by Michael Zappone. FFA chairman Steven Lowy and chief executive David Gallop roundly booed on their introductions. The match officials receive even louder catcalls when they collect their momentos. They rode their luck in the first half but saw out the game superbly in the second. A record fourth championship for Victory, heartbreak for the Jets. It was an occasion that delivered on the hype, especially in a pulsating first half, but Newcastle could not capitalise on their ascendancy. After the break Victory fought their way into the contest and were largely untroubled. VAR will capture headlines for it’s non-use in Victory’s goal and Roy O’Donovan’s red card will join the list of all-time horror challenges but they are footnotes to an historic night for Kevin Muscat and his side. Victory become the first team to win the A-League championship from outside the top-two, and they did so by snatching away wins over the two sides that finished first and second on the ladder. In so doing they rob third-placed Melbourne City a spot in the Asian Champions League. After a season that never found its rhythm and even included Victory fans booing Muscat at AAMI Park, it is a remarkable conclusion. Wow, that is one of the worst challenges you will ever see. That was assault by O’Donovan on Thomas. Free-kick from Petratos that Thomas came out to claim and he receives a late kung-fu kick to his jaw for his troubles. That was horrific. Gillett was on the spot in a flash to brandish the red card, no need for VAR with that one. 90+2 min: Sanchez booked for a professional foul on Petratos and he adds to the frustration of the home crowd by running off with the ball after the whistle blew. 90 min: Victory milking the clock now, finding fouls, keeping the ball away from their danger area. Five minutes added time for the Jets to find an equaliser. 88 min: Another half-chance goes begging for Newcastle. The latest in a long line of dangerous Petratos crosses doesn’t hit a blue target and Victory’s massed ranks clear. The City Football Group will not be happy with this scoreline at all. 87 min: Victory appear to be growing while the Jets flag, late in the game. Barbarouses should do better with a cross down the right but he can’t find a white shirt and Newcastle clear. 86 min: Troisi comes within a whisker of a second, walloping a drive from an acute angle against the post. The interplay with Berisha leading to the chance was probably the neatest of the half from either side. 85 min: McGree turns the ball over in midfield and George takes the opportunity to shoot from 50m away with Moss off his line but the connection is poor and nothing comes of it. It allows Victory to reset their impressive defensive unit though and run more seconds off the clock. 82 min: Half-chance to the Jets and it’s the two subs who fashion it. Rodriguez beats his man down the right, he feeds Hoffman but his cross is clipped over the bar by Champness. 81 min: The crowd tonight is 29,410 and they have been excellent. Credit to the 4,000 or so that have made the trip up from Victoria. 79 min: A quarter of A-League grand final goals are scored in the final 15 minutes, apparently. The Jets don’t look like creating much at the moment though. 76 min: Let-off for Victory. Good deep cross from Petratos, Thomas flies out to punch but misses, the ball ricochets off O’Donovan and loops harmlessly over. Thomas picked up a cut to his noggin for his trouble. He now has the full Terry Butcher bandage situation going on. This will be an iconic look when he collects his Joe Marston medal. Muscat makes his first change of the night and it’s Matias Sanchez for Stefan Nigro. 74 min: Donachie and Deng both deserve recognition for their performances tonight. They were under the pump early on but they did enough to keep the Jets out and now they’re towering in the centre of defence for their side. Rodriguez for Georgiveski is Newcastle’s second substitution. The defender was looking a red card candidate and his replacement is far more attacking. Merrick going for it with 15-minutes to go. 72 min: Victory have the bit between their teeth now, contesting every challenge with intent. They have raised in the second half and the Jets have not matched them. 69 min: How did that stay out? Victory look certain to score a second after a George corner gets headed across the face of goal and almost across the line but O’Donovan does miraculously well to throw himself in front of Berisha and keep the ball out. He receives a massive whack to his cheek in the process as the Victory striker raised his arms to gain leverage for the header. The Irishman looks like a middleweight after ten rounds, a massive lump forming just under his left eye. 67 min: Newcastle cannot get anything going this half. There have been no opportunities to turn defence into attack at pace, no moments of individual brilliance by their creative types, and time is ebbing away. 66 min: A brief stoppage in play while James Troisi is treated for a head injury after being collected by Georgievski in a heading contest. Already on a booking the full-blooded Jets defender has to watch his step. 65 min: Champness enters the fray, replacing Vargas, a man for whom the phrase flatters to deceive springs to mind. 64 min: A few corners in a row to the visitors are testament to how they’ve been the more productive of the two sides this second half. Kevin Muscat deserves great credit for his work at the interval resetting Victory’s tactics and refocussing his player’s mindsets. 62 min: Newcastle’s attacks down the left are much slower and less intricate than the first half. As a consequence George is able to defend more than he did in the early stages, helping out his overworked fullback. Joey Champness is being readied. 59 min: Frustration starting to creep in now for Newcastle with a few innocuous decisions going against them. Victory have pushed noticeably higher up the field this half with Antonis and Troisi getting through a power of work closing down McGree and Ukarkovic, denying the simple release pass. 57 min: Victory fans in the crowd waving cheap dunny seats, causing Simon Hill on commentary to give one of those “to our overseas viewers” explanations. It will never stop being funny. The game remains in neutral with Victory far more assured this half than the first. 55 min: The crowd noise has dipped in tandem with a decline in the standard of play. Ernie Merrick must be tempted to make an early substitution before the Jets lose their early momentum. 54 min: The second half has yet to settle into a pattern, which suits Victory. It’s all very scrappy in midfield with plenty of long balls headed back into the congestion. 51 min: First yellow card of the night goes to Georgievski for a late and clumsy challenge on Barbarouses. 50 min: Thomas asserts himself at the earliest opportunity, claiming a Petratos set piece like Peter Schmeichel bossing an under-12s. 48 min: The second term begins with the Jets on the front foot again looking to capitalise on their advantage down the left flank. 46 min: Second half is underway. No changes at the interval. If Victory hang on the Joe Marston medal can only go to one man - the exceptional Lawrence Thomas. His first half was massive. Riley McGree and Dimitri Petratos have shone for the Jets and if they come back that pair will surely have had a hand in it. All the half time analysis on TV and all the noise on social media is about VAR’s role in Victory’s goal. Replays appear to leave little doubt that Donachie and other white shirts were offside when George whipped in his free-kick but the goal was allowed to stand. Robbie Slater is apoplectic about it on TV. Some half time stats: Newcastle have dominated the ball, enjoying 65% of possession. The Jets lead the shot count 11-3 but only three of those have been on target, where they’ve found Lawrence Thomas in inspired form. No yellow cards to report. Phew! That was breathless helter-skelter stuff. Great fun. One minute of added time at the end of the first-half. Most of it is taken up with Petratos lining up a deep crossfield free-kick that comes to nought. Somehow, despite an almighty battering, Melbourne Victory are one-nil to the good. 44 min: Vargas again collects the ball in a dangerous area but elects not to shoot on his left when space materialised, instead feeding the ball back inside and the chance fizzles out. 41 min: Vargas has been full of tricks and spins but his end product has been lacking. If he finds his range the Jets could be in business but a sloppy pass in midfield allows Victory to snuff out another attack at source. 39 min: Victory are so deep in defence when they do clear their lines all they can muster are isolated solo salvos. It helps that Leroy George is among their forwards and his strength keeps Newcastle’s defenders honest and then earns a free-kick in a dangerous position that earns a couple of minutes in more preferred territory. 36 min: I’m not sure I’ve seen a more one-sided contest where the scoreboard does not reflect the balance of play. McGree is running the midfield, Petratos has the bit between his teeth and the game is being played almost entirely in Victory’s defensive half. Still, they have the lead, and they have Lawrence Thomas. 33 min: McGree, Petratos and Koutroumbis have been at the heart of all that’s been good for the Jets tonight. Again they work space down the left but this time there’s no opportunity for a final ball. Victory need to rethink their right-hand side. 31 min: How are the Jets not level!? Thomas again with a superb save, low to his left after brilliant play from the increasingly effective McGree. The victory keeper then somehow manages to recover and smuggle Hoffman’s effort over the bar from point-blank range. 29 min: Victory have worked their way back into the contest, evening up the midfield duel and fashioning a couple of half-chances. 24 min: Scrappy couple of minutes with the ball pinging from one set of defenders to the other like an anti-rondo demonstration. Riley McGree does his best to settle things down, he’s growing into the game nicely in the centre of midfield. Ahead of him Petratos remains the most dangerous outlet and again he tricks his way beyond Nigro and dinks a cross over but there’s no finish to match the preparation. 21 min: Newcastle are prospering down the left where Nigro is again failing to cover himself in glory at right-back for Victory. Petratos, Koutroumbis and Vargas are making neat combinations at will but they still have nothing to show for it. 20 min: A goal-kick offers brief respite for Victory in the face of an onslaught from the Jets. This remains full-blooded and frenetic. 18 min: Brilliant save from Thomas! Reflex dive low to his left to keep out O’Donovan’s flick after great build-up down the left between Petratos and Koutroumbis. The Jets are all over Victory right now!. 16 min: Half-chance for the Jets courtesy of yet another wicked ball from Petratos. It’s a long free-kick this time that curls agonisingly away from Thomas who has to come out to try to punch but he doesn’t connect offering a glimmer to the leaping Hoffman behind him but he can’t put boot to ball. 14 min: It remains all Newcastle on-field but Victory have the crucial advantage on the scoreboard. Whenever the visitors take possession the Jets rob them of it in an instant but their rapid incursions forward have yet to catch Victory napping. Hmmmm. Replays are starting to filter through of the build-up to Victory’s opener and there is a distinct hint of offside when Donachie heads the ball across goal. VAR studied it but gave it the all-clear. We’re unlikely to have heard the last of that. 11 min: Newcastle respond immediately fashioning two decent attacks that Victory do enough to scramble away. Petratos has been lively, finding space in the final third and whipping in trademark crosses. The earliest goal in grand final history goes to Melbourne Victory. A long free-kick from Leroy George finds the towering Donachie at the far post, his centring header falls to Barbarouses who drills hard and low beyond Glen Moss via a deflection off Koutroumbis. VAR had a look for offside at the original header but it’s given the all-clear. 8 min: The Jets have started to settle and move the ball around. Victory, by contrast have yet to establish any rhythm. The TV cuts to Bert van Marwijk in the stands, he’s back in the country! 6 min: First proper attacking opportunity falls to the home side. O’Donovan is wrestled to the ground just to the right of the penalty area and Petratos’ teasing cross just evades three Novocastrian foreheads, skimming off one and away to safety. 4 min: This is yet to blossom into a celebration of the beautiful game. The pace is too hot for anyone to put their foot on the ball or connect with more than one pass in a sequence. James Donachie looks beautiful with his new bleached blonde crop though, like an 80s Bond villain in the mould of Dolph Lundgren or Brigitte Nielsen. 2 min: As expected it’s pinball during the opening stages with both sides sprinting out some nervous energy. The 2018 A-League grand final is underway! Seconds away from kick-off. Hannah Ringrow calmly nails the national anthem a capella while smoke drifts across McDonald Jones Stadium. The stage is set. Out stride the two teams to deafening noise, fireworks, and a sea of flags. This is fizzing beautifully. It’s cool, clear, dry and still in Newcastle. Perfect conditions for football. The pitch doesn’t seem half bad either, despite an NRL fixture taking place last night. The two teams are making their way down the race. Newcastle are clad in their all-royal blue home strip, Victory in their all-white change uniform. Some grand final stats for you, courtesy of Opta. Head-to-head: Newcastle Jets have won two of their last three games against Melbourne Victory, this after having gone without a win in their previous five games against them. Melbourne Victory have won just one of their last 12 visits to McDonald Jones Stadium (D5, L6), posting a 1-0 win there in January 2016. Kosta Barbarouses has scored in two of his three appearances versus Newcastle Jets this season; he comes into this game having scored in the semi-final against Sydney. Grand final history: Just once in the previous 12 seasons has the host of the Grand Final lost the competition decider played at their home ground (2009/10). Newcastle Jets won their only previous Grand Final appearance (2007/08), while Melbourne Victory have won three of their previous five with both losses in that time coming via penalties. Success in this game will mean that Melbourne Victory will have been A-League Champions on more occasions than any other side, they have currently done it three times alongside Sydney FC and Brisbane Roar. Besart Berisha has scored five goals in A-League Grand Finals, the joint-most of any player in competition history alongside Archie Thompson. Other: This game will see the league’s two most prolific creators go head-to-head; Leroy George (75) and Dimitri Petratos (74) have created more scoring chances than any other player in the competition (next best, 55 -Andrew Hoole). Just because. An A-League grand final build-up wouldn’t be worthy of the name without checking in with David Squires. If only Ernie had rocked up tonight in a leopard-print onesie... The unexpected absence of Sydney FC makes this grand final an unpredictable affair tactically, as Ante Jukic explains. The crowd in Newcastle is being ‘treated’ to some pregame entertainment courtesy of some LED-clad percussion and DJ noise while more LED-clad people jig about around them and a few kids juggle glow-in-the-dark footballs. It’s fine, and has actually picked up the longer it’s gone on, but still.... yeah nah. In case you didn’t know, the Jets owner’s wealth comes from LEDs. Kevin Muscat: I don’t think I’ve worked with a more resilient group than the one I’ve got at the moment. It was unbelievable what they went through (against Sydney FC) and the performance they put on. I can only imagine how our members and fans felt watching that and the pride that they would have enjoyed and we made a lot of people happy on Saturday night and we certainly look to do that again on Saturday.” Ernie Merrick: They spend a lot of money on players, they won it in 2015, they lost it last year, so I think they’d be pretty keen to win and I think the pressure is on them. I’ve tried to get the pressure off our boys by getting them to relax and enjoy themselves. When it comes, our boys will perform and we’ll see who the better team on the night is. I was trying to avoid this aggressiveness that occurs in the Big Blue for example — it doesn’t make for a great spectacle. Certainly it was an exciting game (last week) especially in that match because of the goal in the dying seconds of normal time, but I think the crowd want to be entertained with much more free flowing, attacking football and that’s what we’ve been playing all year.” Before we check in with the coaches, a reminder their history goes deep. That relationship is far less convivial nowadays and with so much on the line sparks could fly in the technical areas tonight. Newcastle Jets have the opportunity tonight to vault from wooden spooners one season to premiers the next. Just reaching the grand final is a rarity in Australian sport, as AAP’s Vince Rugari details. NSWRL/NRL Sydney Roosters: bottom in 2009, beaten in 2010 grand final by St George Illawarra Western Suburbs: bottom in 1933, won 1934 grand final against Eastern Suburbs Newtown: bottom in 1928, beaten in 1929 grand final by South Sydney St George: bottom in 1926, beaten in 1927 grand final by South Sydney AFL/VFL Collingwood: bottom in 1976, beaten in 1977 grand final replay by North Melbourne Fitzroy: bottom in 1916, beaten in 1917 grand final by Collingwood (note: only six teams participated in 1917 and four in 1916 due to World War I. Fitzroy also won grand final as well as wooden spoon in 1916 after four-team finals series SUPER RUGBY Sharks: bottom in 2000, beaten in 2001 grand final by Brumbies Highlanders: bottom in 1997, beaten in 1998 grand final by Blues NSL/A-LEAGUE Newcastle Jets: bottom in 2016/17, face Melbourne Victory in 2017/18 grand final Brisbane City: bottom in 1978, beaten in 1979 post-series play-off final by Sydney City (note: Marconi recognised as champions) The atmosphere at McDonald Jones stadium is already something special, half-an-hour away from kick-off! Who knew an appropriately-sized rectangular stadium could facilitate such a spectacle? Your officials for the big one: Referee: Jarred Gillett Assistant Referee 1: Matthew Cream Assistant Referee 2: Paul Cetrangolo Fourth Official: Kurt Ams Fifth Official: Andrew Lindsay Video Assistant Referee: Craig Zetter Following the suspensions handed down to JP de Marigny and Dean Anastasiadis the role of Victory assistant coach tonight falls to fitness guru Anthony Crea. He will be joined on the bench by a familiar face, Victory football operations manager and living legend, Paul Trimboli. More on the Jets, this time from Richard Parkin, looking at how a unity of purpose from the owner down has created such a high-functioning football club this season. Win or lose tonight Newcastle’s renaissance has been the feelgood story of the season. John Davidson reminds us how far the Jets have come in such a short space of time. Victory’s starting XI is as expected, and unchanged from their semi-final victory over Sydney FC. There’s movement on the bench though with Christian Theoharous collecting an injury at Allianz Stadium forcing the dangerous impact substitute to concede his place to Jai Ingham. The only other two members of the Victory squad not at Kevin Muscat’s disposal are long-term absentee Mitch Austin, and the horribly unlucky Rhys Williams. Plenty of focus will fall on auxiliary defender Stefan Nigro. The youngster was a late inclusion last week and didn’t cover himself in glory in a performance containing a calamitous own-goal. He will have his hands full again against the free-scoring Jets. In midfield Terry Antonis will be the centre of attention following his remarkable showing against Sydney FC. He is vital to knitting Victory’s defence and attack, and in a game likely to feature plenty of broken play his ability to hold everything together will be crucial. Further forward despite turning in a far from vintage campaign Besart Berisha is finding touch at the business end. A finals specialist there’s nobody in Australian football you’d back more than the Albanian to step up on the big occasion. Just the one change to Newcastle’s XI with veteran Glen Moss replacing Jack Duncan following the regular keeper’s untimely injury during the semi final. Ivan Necevski has been press-ganged into a spot on the bench. Moss will be under immense scrutiny tonight but the 35-year old has been around long enough to handle the pressure. He sat on the bench for Victory in the 2009-10 decider. Ben Kantarovski remains a major absentee for Ernie Merrick and the club stalwart along with Wayne Brown would both be in the matchday squad had they been fit. Good evening everybody and welcome to live coverage of the showpiece event in Australian club football, the A-League grand final between Newcastle Jets and Melbourne Victory. Kick off at a jam-packed McDonald Jones Stadium is 7.56pm AET, giving us plenty of time to ease ourselves into a grand final state of mind. I can confirm well in advance that tonight’s going to be ace. How could it not be? We’ve got a full house in a regional centre, one steeped in football history, barracking for the Jets - a team riding one of the all-time most absurd waves of form. In case you’re not up to speed, Newcastle were rubbish for a long time, failing to make the finals since 2010 and finishing dead last last season. Ignoring all that baggage, Ernie Merrick strode into town in the offseason, recruited smartly, and told his side to play without fear. They went on to finish second, scoring the goal of the season along the way, and then won through to the grand final, scoring one of the goals of all-time in the process. It has been a rip-roaring football story. Not only will the Jets have a passionate home crowd behind them, pretty much the rest of the footballing community will be in their corner, in part because their opponents tonight are perennial grand finalists and serial winners Melbourne Victory. This has been a far from vintage season for one of the competition’s powerhouses but they’ve come good when it matters and Kevin Muscat is now just 90 minutes away from hoisting aloft the glittering toilet seat. I cannot wait. If you would like to join in during the evening feel free to do so by email (Jonathan.howcroft.freelance@guardian.co.uk) or twitter @JPHowcroft. It would be lovely to have some correspondence.
14||UK basks as temperatures climb towards record levelsThe bank holiday weekend has got off to a fine and dry start as most of the UK enjoys sunshine and blue skies. Around 10m vehicles were expected to hit the road over the next three days in what is expected to be one of the hottest May bank holidays on record. The temperatures will peak on Monday when they are forecast to “smash” the previous record, set in 1999. Dean Hall, a meteorologist for the Met Office, said: “It’s going to be a great May bank holiday weekend, which is notorious for usually being quite wet and miserable. Temperatures will rise day by day as we go through the weekend and into Monday, which is set to be the warmest bank holiday Monday on record. “Most parts of the country will enjoy unbroken sunshine and very warm temperatures,” he said. “We’ll see low to mid-20s in most parts of the UK, while areas in the south-east should expect high 20s.” The bank holiday was introduced in 1978 and the hottest weekend was in 1995, when a temperature of 28C was recorded in Cheltenham. The warmest temperature for the bank holiday Monday alone was 23.6C in 1999. “We’ll easily smash that record on Monday,” Hall said. “It wouldn’t surprise me if we reached highs of 28C.” Many people were expected to visit coastal towns and beauty spots to make the most of the weather. A spokesman for the AA, Luke Bosdet, said: “This weekend is going to be like the Easter we didn’t have. Easter was early and ended up being cold so there wasn’t much fun and joy. Now we have good weather, people are taking advantage and getting out to enjoy the great outdoors. Bosdet said drivers should be prepared for congestion. “There is a consequence to the good weather and that is you’re getting a lot of people on the road. On a typical bank holiday with good weather, we see in the region of 10m cars hitting the road.” He said high traffic levels could be expected on the M23 to Brighton, the roads to Cumbria and the A303 towards the West Country. “They tend to be the usual suspects for bad congestion and delays. My advice is for people to keep an eye on the travel updates before heading out and to be aware that trouble often hits when everyone comes back on Monday evening at the same time.” Rail travellers could expect a miserable weekend, as Network Rail carried out hundreds of maintenance and upgrade projects. Major work between Glasgow and Edinburgh meant East Coast services would start and terminate at Edinburgh, while West Coast trains would not run north of Lancaster-Oxenholme Lake District on Sunday. Liverpool’s mainline services were being reduced, with some replaced by buses or diverted via Manchester from Saturday to Monday. No trains would serve London Paddington on Sunday, which would also force the suspension of Heathrow Express trains. Network Rail’s chief executive, Mark Carne, said: “While most of the network is open for business as usual, some routes are heavily affected and so we strongly advise passengers to plan ahead this May.” For those staying closer to home the weather was also perfect for gardening, according to Guy Barter, the chief horticulturist of the Royal Horticultural Society. “So far this spring, weather conditions will have delayed some tasks in the garden,” he said. “With a fine forecast for the three-day weekend across most of the UK, gardeners should feel excited they will have the time to invest in their gardens and also have time to spend relaxing with families and friends enjoying the fruits of their labours. A perfect end to National Gardening Week.” Hall warned those heading out to enjoy the sunshine to take precautions to protect their skin and eyes as UV levels were strong. Pollen levels were also high so hayfever sufferers may be affected.
10||Gun control activists protest NRA's first annual meeting since ParklandThe Resistance Now is a weekly update on the people, action and ideas driving the protest movement in the US. If you’re not already receiving it by email, subscribe. Protests at NRA’s first annual meeting since Parkland Gun control activists are to meet 80,000 National Rifle Association supporters in Dallas this weekend, where the gun lobby is hosting its annual three-day meeting. The convention is being held less than two months after the push for gun control drew thousands to protests across the country and inspired one of the largest student demonstrations in US history. An additional stressor for the NRA is the impact these actions and Donald Trump’s divisiveness will have on the Republican party heading into the November midterms. The Guardian’s Lois Beckett has done a great breakdown of the six threats facing the NRA here and will be reporting from the convention all weekend. Trump, whose campaign accepted more than $30m from the NRA in 2016, spoke Friday afternoon at the first day of the convention. “Thanks to your activism and dedication. You have an administration fighting to protect your second amendment and we will protect your second amendment,” he said. And if you’re wondering why the NRA is so powerful, the Guardian US business editor, Dominic Rushe, has the answer here. Teacher backs immigrants and refugees in moment with Trump At the White House this week, the National Teacher of the Year staged a silent protest by wearing overtly political badges, including one with a poster for the Women’s March, when she accepted her award from Trump. Mandy Manning, who leads a classroom for teenage refugees in Washington, also wore badges that supported the LGBT community to the annual ceremony. Manning told the Associated Press that in a private moment with Trump she gave the president letters written by her students and the community that she hoped would convey what coming to the US means for refugees and immigrants. Immigration lawyers have warned repeatedly that White House policies are slowing immigration to the US. And refugee groups have been sounding an alarm about the the fall in refugee admissions this fiscal year. Only 10,584 people have been admitted in the past six months, compared with 39,000 refugee admissions in the same period in 2017, according to the International Rescue Committee (IRC). The annual ceremony took place against the backdrop of teachers’ strikes in Arizona, Colorado, Kentucky, Oklahoma and West Virginia amid complaints over stagnant pay and shrinking pensions. What we’re reading Puerto Rican police fired tear gas at protesters on Tuesday during May Day demonstrations in the capital, San Juan. The peaceful march was held in response to austerity measures placed on the island by a controversial oversight board. The role of the board has become even more contentious as the island is still far from recovering from the devastation of Hurricane Maria in September 2017. “I don’t know what we will leave our young daughter,” one protester told NBC News. “This is just such an ugly panorama right now.” Over at BuzzFeed, Scaachi Koul goes deep into the college Republicans’ internal struggles in lefty California, where some fear opposition to Trump will give Democrats an even greater hold on the Golden State. Koul writes how this young segment of the GOP reflects the broader struggle in the party: “Do Republican politicians need to be bold, unapologetic, and often wildly offensive, to be effective? Or should they return to the decorum and professional tenor formerly expected in politics?”
4||Joe Wicks: ‘Other personal trainers think I got lucky’I was a hyperactive child. I wasn’t very academic and I had a very short attention span. I was a bit of a class clown and was always messing around. My school reports used to say: “Joe has great potential if only he stopped chatting in class.” The only thing I was good at was sport and before I became a personal trainer, I wanted to become a PE teacher. You can have an awesome physique by doing just 25 minutes exercise a day. That’s all I do. I was always a very skinny kid. From the age of 16, I tried to build my frame. I used to do a lot of weights. I’d probably spend about an hour and a half in the gym every day, but as I’ve got older I’ve cut that down. The occasional drink is my only vice. I probably get drunk twice a month, if I go out with friends. I used to like going out and partying, but now it’s more often a nice dinner, cocktails and home by midnight. I wasn’t born ambitious, but I am ambitious now. My mum is a social worker and my dad’s a roofer. My brother Nicky and I were the first two in my family to go to university. When I started to grow my audience and connect on social media and achieve certain things, like the book deal, then I became way more ambitious. The minute you have a little bit of success, you think: “I can do more and I can reach more people.” So as I’ve achieved more, I’ve become way more focused. I may appear famous on Instagram, but I’m not someone who is going to red carpet events and has loads of celebrity mates. I haven’t let that affect me. I just do my thing. I lead a really private life away from that and I’ve managed to keep a balance. What matters is friends and family and community – actual relationships. You have to become antisocial to become a social media star. In the early days, I was addicted to social media. I had to be on it and be engaged. When I was with my family and friends I was just constantly on my phone, replying to everything. But now it’s much more able to sustain itself although I do still probably post 10 times a day on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat. It’s a hamster wheel. I’m really not a sex symbol. People might leave cheeky comments on Instagram like, “I’d love to marry you,” but it’s not like I’m going out to clubs and meeting loads of women. It’s not real. It’s just a social-media thing. I’m in a happy relationship, so I don’t need that or crave that attention. The most negativity I get is from other personal trainers as they think I got lucky. I love a success story, but some people get jealous. I don’t ever engage in negative stuff. I just ignore it and keep spreading my message. The Joe Wicks Café opens as part of the Lifestyle Lab at Westfield London and Westfield Stratford City from 3 May, uk.westfield.com/london
14||Jumpsuits, zip cams, vegan cake: the latest trends in weddingsIt’s unlikely Prince Harry and Meghan Markle will rig cameras on zipwires across the lawns of Windsor Castle for their big day this month. But if they do, they’ll be joining a growing number of couples turning to new tech to capture the moment like never before. Zipwire cameras might sound like props on a sci-fi film but they are one of the quirky new trends for weddings this summer as brides ditch flowing gowns in favour of jumpsuits, and vegan cakes replace the traditional multi-tiered extravaganza. With most marriage ceremonies now involving millennials who are comfortable with adapting traditions to suit their own agenda, weddings are now being planned to take account of social media and concern for the environment, according to the big names in nuptials, from fashion designers to videographers. “The whole make-up of weddings is changing,” said bridalwear designer Charlie Brear, who has dressed model and fashion designer Alexa Chung and actress Sienna Miller. “There’s a lot less formality, and it’s all Pinterest, Instagram and social media-led. Brides want to step out of the norm, and make a statement they can share.” So out go the sweeping, fishtail trains, she said, and in come the all-in-one jumpsuits – talk of the fashion world since bridalwear designer Misha Nonoo, a close friend of Markle, released a spring jumpsuit collection. “They’ll be all the rage this year. The jumpsuit offers something more rock’n’roll, a bit cooler and easier to wear, but still elegant,” Brear said. The bonus is that the jumpsuit is easier to repurpose than a wedding dress, so it can be reworn once the confetti has blown away. And with the average white gown costing more than most people earn in a month (Brear’s range from £1,500 to £5,000), jumpsuits are a lot cheaper too. “If you accessorise it with a black belt, a black high heel and a black jacket you can wear it on any night of the week,” she said. If you’re going to walk the aisle in a jumpsuit, chances are you’ll want something different to eat and drink too. “When I got married, the centrepiece of the reception was a rich fruit cake,” said Rosalind Miller, a cake-maker whose show-stoppers are sold at Harrods. “But nobody wants fruit cake any more. Vegan cakes are now the big new trend.” Miller puts it down to what she calls a “generational thing” – the march of the millennials to ever more conscious decision-making. But cakes free of even the tiniest trace of animal products are tricky to make. “You have to find substitutes for everything – butter, eggs, milk, chocolate ganache,” says Miller. “Even the sugar flower petals have egg whites, so we have to use fresh flowers instead.” There’s also a trend for simpler cakes – what Miller calls “the naked cake” – with none of the traditional sugar paste icing. “More and more couples want their weddings to be natural and stripped back,” she said. There is nothing “natural” about squadrons of tiny cameras zooming across the matrimonial dance floor, though. Yet zipwire cameras are a game-changer in wedding videos, said Andrew Gemmell, a film-maker who has chronicled the weddings and private shindigs of celebrities including Elton John, Poppy Delevingne and David Beckham. “Zipwire cameras are great for shooting the dancing or the speeches. Almost like on a ski lift, they grab on to the wire then propel themselves along, panning side to side above the guests. It gives you angles you’d never dreamt of,” he said. Gemmell says that drones, GoPros and zipwire cameras are now essential gizmos for any videographer worth their salt. “It’s great – you control multiple cameras from your mobile phone, you meld into the wedding like a guest.” But there’s another technologically advanced way to blend in. Gemmell predicts the next big thing will be the “virtual guest” – a sort of Segway-iPad hybrid that will allow people who cannot get to a wedding to live and experience the occasion remotely. “With this thing, you can walk down the aisle, move around the reception, join in conversations – all at head height,” he said. The other attractive feature of the virtual guest, he said, is that if he or she is being annoying “the hosts can just turn the wifi off and shut them down”. Getting hitched in style For cakes... “No longer square or round, but petal shaped, hexagonal, oblong or teardropped. These shapes can be mixed together.” Natasha Collins, founder of Nevie-Pie Cakes, available at The Wedding Gallery “Vibrant colours of the rainbow, paired with contrasting black or white.” Rosalind Miller, founder of Rosalind Miller Cakes, available at Harrods For bridesmaids... “Brides want each bridesmaid to look their best and one style doesn’t always suit all. The mix-and-match trend is growing in popularity and ensures everyone looks great.” Rosanna Garden,bridesmaid gown designer and founder of www.moteemaids.co.uk For men... “Suits in bright hues – purple, burgundy or ink blue – are massively on-trend. There’s a fine line between cool and not cool when it comes to tweed but you can walk it the right way in 2018.” Dominic Troope, men’s fashion stylist at The Wedding Gallery,www.the-weddinggallery.com For flowers... “Granny as flower girl! I love alternative ways to march up the aisle.” Sandra von Riekhoff, photographer, founder of Divine Day Photography, www.divine-dayphotography.com For the invitation... “Printing on unusual material such as linen, wood and metal. The scope is fantastic.” Louise Richardson of Louise Richardson Bespoke Stationery
14||Cambridge Analytica is dead – but its obscure network is alive and wellThe announcement that Cambridge Analytica is shutting has a certain inevitability to it. Ever since 17 March 2018, when Carole Cadwalladr broke Christopher Wylie’s whistleblower story at the Observer and in the New York Times, there have been continuous revelations about Cambridge Analytica and its parent company, SCL Group, and their brazen use – or misuse – of Facebook data and dirty tricks. But given the complex business structure of SCL and Cambridge Analytica’s UK and US affiliates, there are reasons to question precisely what Wednesday’s announcement means. Already there are some suggestions that those associated with Cambridge Analytica may re-emerge in another form. Are Cambridge Analytica and SCL Group attempting to evade recent negative coverage, only to re-form and continue their work as part of a new entity? Damian Collins, the British MP who chairs the digital, culture, media and sport Committee that is investigating SCL and Cambridge Analytica, tweeted some words of caution on Wednesday after the news broke, noting that CA and SCL “cannot be allowed to delete their data history by closing”. Certainly the news presents as many questions as answers. Cambridge Analytica and SCL have at least 18 active companies, branches, and affiliates with similar names, based in the UK and the US. The complex relationship among these companies makes it very difficult to understand how revenues, employment, and data are shared. It almost seems as though the business structure was created to make it impossible to track decision-making and funding. On Wednesday afternoon Cambridge Analytica issued a press release stating: “SCL Elections Ltd., as well as certain of its and Cambridge Analytica LLC’s U.K. affiliates (collectively, the ‘Company’ or ‘Cambridge Analytica’) filed applications to commence insolvency proceedings in the U.K.” It also stated that “parallel bankruptcy proceedings will soon be commenced on behalf of Cambridge Analytica LLC and certain of the Company’s U.S. affiliates in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York.” It is notable that Cambridge Analytica’s press release does not mention SCL Group Limited, SCL Social Ltd, or SCL Insight Ltd. Is it closing only some affiliates and leaving others open? Shortly after the whistleblower story on Cambridge Analytica’s use of Facebook data broke in March, the Cambridge Analytica CEO, Alexander Nix, was suspended and three US states opened investigations into Cambridge Analytica and Facebook. In the following weeks, current and past employees of Cambridge Analytica and Facebook have testified in the UK, the US, Canada and other countries, and a US and UK class action lawsuit was filed against both companies in early April. However, reporting on Cambridge Analytica – from Cadwalladr and others – had begun to appear in 2015 and 2016 and intensified throughout 2017. While Cambridge Analytica and SCL Group began to be the focus of more media scrutiny, in the background, company executives were quietly setting up a new company. Emerdata Limited was incorporated in August 2017 with SCL Group’s chairman, Julian Wheatland, and SCL’s chief data officer, Alexander Tayler, as original owners, but the company suddenly expanded with new directors and funding this year. On 23 January 2018, four new directors were appointed to Emerdata, including Johnson Chun Shun Ko, who happens to be deputy chairman of Frontier Services Group. On the same day that Ko joined the board of Emerdata, shares were issued valued at £1,912,502. On 7 March 2018, Firecrest Technologies Limited was incorporated, with Alexander Nix listed briefly as director and then replaced by Alexander Tayler, and Emerdata listed as the owner. And on 16 March, a few days before the Cambridge Analytica whistleblower story broke, two more directors joined Emerdata, Jennifer and Rebekah Mercer. There has been much reporting on how Robert and Rebekah Mercer have funded US political action committees (Pacs) that have paid Cambridge Analytica, but there had been little public evidence showing a current legal or business connection from the Mercers to Cambridge Analytica. The business purpose of Emerdata is not known, beyond the general description of “data processing, hosting and related activities”. However, in a Channel 4 News report, the SCL Group founder, Nigel Oakes, said it was his understanding that Emerdata was set up to acquire all of Cambridge Analytica and SCL. Emerdata did not respond to multiple requests for comment sent to several company directors. The news Wednesday about the closure of Cambridge Analytica does not mention Emerdata or its subsidiary Firecrest Technologies. And just one day earlier, on Tuesday, the UK Companies House website posted an update on Emerdata, noting two pending filings, for “Resolution of removal of pre-emption rights” and “Resolution of allotment of securities”. The documents are being processed and will be available in five days. Perhaps these filings will show that the company is dissolving, or perhaps they will be the standard filings of an active company. All of the other UK SCL-related companies are still listed as active and have no pending filings. The beleaguered Nix is still listed as an active director and shareholder of SCL Group and many of the related companies. Wednesday’s news is big, but it is not clear yet what it means, and whether SCL, Cambridge Analytica, Emerdata and the same executives who ran these companies during the Brexit campaign and US election will re-emerge in a new entity to continue their work.
13||How Sheikh Mansour’s decade-long spree made Manchester City aristocratsWhen Liverpool went to the Etihad Stadium for their smash-and-grab victory over Manchester City in the Champions League quarter-final second leg it was odd to hear their fans sing the straight version of We Shall Not Be Moved – “just like a team that’s going to win the European Cup”. City fans’ version of that anthem was lyrically adjusted 19 years ago, when supporters who grew up on a team of internationals in the early 1970s found themselves trailing around League One while Manchester United were on their way to the treble. Watching in disbelief defeats that 1998-99 season by Lincoln City, York City and Wycombe Wanderers, standing in Blackpool’s Bloomfield Road, which had two sides condemned, some City wags reworked the words to: “We’re not really here.” It is still sung every game, the same statement of disbelief, but now at the spectacle of a world-class team in sky blue, the most expensively assembled squad in football, and the sport’s most coveted coach actually managing Manchester City. Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed al-Nahyan, a senior son in Abu Dhabi’s ruling dynasty, bought the club 10 seasons ago, nine years after City squeaked up from League One on penalties following Paul Dickov’s 94th-minute equaliser in the Wembley play-off final against Gillingham. On Sunday, in the stadium built with public money for the 2002 Commonwealth Games, then handed to City the year after and now sponsored by the Abu Dhabi state airline, Pep Guardiola’s team will be handed their third Premier League trophy since Mansour landed. In 116 years before that – the club was formed in 1880 as a form of social work by Anna Connell, the vicar’s daughter at St Mark’s Church – City won the league title twice. They won the League Cup twice after it began in 1960, first in 1970 during the 1968-70 era that was previously the club’s best ever, then in 1976, Dennis Tueart’s dashing overhead kick winner having to sustain a generation for 35 years of loyalty and, mostly, cock-ups. The new incarnation of Manchester City have won the League Cup three times in the past five seasons, a triumph now barely registered. This season’s third was picked up on the way to winning the Premier League but Guardiola’s specified target of succeeding in Europe was challenged by losing to Liverpool. So this decade of Abu Dhabi mega-investment has not been a reclamation of past supremacy – as Liverpool’s resurgence now feels – but rather a whole new ball game. When the takeover was announced in August 2008, there was understandable wariness about whether it was real and there were guffaws at first about the idea that Manchester City were going to buy the world’s best players and be rebuilt along the lines of Barcelona. The seriousness of that intention has been inexorably accepted over the decade, with £1.2bn invested from Abu Dhabi, the players recruited, trophies attained, stadium expanded to 55,000 capacity, the power-projecting academy and “Etihad campus” built next to it – and Barcelona’s former chief executive, director of football and coach working for City on Ashton New Road. When Mark Hughes was sacked as manager in December 2009, news of Roberto Mancini’s pending appointment having leaked before Hughes’s final game in the sleet against Sunderland, there was widespread ridicule of City’s official explanation that Hughes had failed to reach his “targets”. There were fewer sneers by 2013 when City said the same about targets as they sacked Mancini, who the previous season had delivered their first Premier League title with Sergio Agüero’s 94th-minute winner against Hughes’s QPR. The club’s hierarchy plays down the apparent conclusion that this is an Abu Dhabi state project, expanded now to City-owned clubs in New York and Melbourne, and ownership too of Girona, Yokohama Marinos and the Uruguayan club Atlético Torque, as well as partnerships to polish young players from the Netherlands to Venezuela. City, the hierarchy maintains, is a private investment by Mansour – they present the holding company City Football Group as the owner, not Abu Dhabi itself. They point to the emirate not being overtly promoted in this most globally broadcast of its ventures, although its tourist authority, Visit Abu Dhabi, is a sponsor on the City billboards and the Etihad name is hardly hidden under a bushel. Students of football history have always learned that a key achievement of Herbert Chapman’s visionary building of Arsenal in the 1930s was having the Gillespie Road tube station renamed after the club. Now the Etihad campus has its own Metrolink station taking supporters to the ground, so in modern football Manchester City have secured a transport stop named after the club’s sponsor. The very start of the takeover was different. It did look like a private purchase then, even something of a whim by Mansour, who already owned a football club in Abu Dhabi. The City deal was fronted by Sulaiman al-Fahim, a Dubai property developer, who boasted about the stars City were going to sign and the “very deep pockets” of the club’s new owner. This vulgarity did not play at all well in Abu Dhabi, whose ruling family has sought to marry the windfall of oil billions to a dignified national style. Fahim was moved aside in days and a senior figure in the country’s business and government institutions, Khaldoon al-Mubarak, assigned to chair the City investment and its reputation-shaping implications. It is a testament to how carefully Mubarak and his executives have approached it that, while there have been persistent objections, particularly in Europe, to their claiming football success by vast spending of a country’s resources, they have also won friends at home. They understood that, for all its new money, English football is still rooted in supporters’ loyalty and expected to be a community activity and that the stadium and Commonwealth Games were intended as catalysts for economic revival in post-industrial east Manchester. The Abu Dhabi investors donated 5.5 acres of the 80 cleaned up for the campus, valued at £18m, and contributed a further £3m towards an excellent new public leisure centre and swimming pool next to it. A new sixth-form college named after Anna Connell also sits on the land, next to the new Manchester Institute of Health and Performance, which is used by the club and community and in the rehabilitation of some victims of the Arena terror atrocity last year. There has not been notably vocal support in Manchester for the protests raised by campaign groups over human rights in Abu Dhabi, which have focused on the conditions of migrant workers and the 2011 crackdown on dissenters following calls for more democracy. In 2016 Manchester city council’s leader, Sir Richard Leese, declined a request by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch to condemn the abuses, replying in a letter that “the alleged issues are beyond the remit of the city council”. Then and now the council’s assessment of their Abu Dhabi investors, who are also involved in residential projects, is: “They have made commitments not only to develop a successful business but also to invest in the regeneration of the city. They have honoured every commitment and we have found them to be exemplary partners.” At the end of 10 seasons that began with the then barmy-seeming aspiration to be “Barcelona plus” Guardiola, given £200m to spend on players last summer and £57m for Aymeric Laporte in January, is expected to be further furnished this summer with a central midfield player, centre-back and forward. The aim over the next 10 years is to become “Barcelona plus plus” and nobody doubts anymore the seriousness of that, however improbable it still feels at Manchester City, for all of this to be really here.
8||Spirit of ’68 bows to market forces as rebel icons go on saleIn the turbulent days of May 1968 in Paris, a group of artists calling itself Atelier Populaire launched a guerrilla operation to turn out thousands of agitprop posters boosting the class struggle. As student sit-ins and strikes spread, the collective’s secret printing press, hidden inside the prestigious École des Beaux-Arts where the artists also slept, churned out content day and night. The hastily produced posters, many featuring a clenched fist, were often date-stamped but rarely signed. The message, not the messenger, was of primary importance; the posters were “weapons of the struggle”, not for decoration or display in “bourgeois places of culture” and certainly not for sale – ever. Fifty years on, as France marks the anniversary of May 1968 with a new wave of strikes and student protests, the leftwing idealism of the Atelier Populaire has been trumped by the commerical instincts of the free market. Today the posters are on display in museums and for sale at auctions and galleries across the world with prices topping £2,000. Currently there are exhibitions at the Musée de Beaux-Arts in Paris, and on sale at the Royal Academy’s London Original Print Fair, the Tate Modern and at Lazinc gallery in Mayfair. The dealer, Gerrish Fine Art, has amassed more than 150 rare and original Atelier Populaire posters, some of which are on sale at the RA fair for between £350 and and £2,250 each. “These icons of rebellion and civil disorder are the forerunners of today’s thriving street art movement. As monuments to the intense power of the image to bring about change, they represent one of the most potent and striking graphic revolutions in history – fierce symbols of art at the service of insurrection,” it writes. Art experts now predict a boom in demand for the work that is credited as an inspiration for punk art in the 1970s and Banksy today. Not everyone is delighted by this belated critical recognition. The French political scientist, Thomas Guénolé, a member of the hard-left France Insoumise (France Unbowed) party is shocked, but not surprised. “We have a civilisation that cannot accept that there are some things that have no price,” Guénolé told the Observer. “The Atelier Populaire was vehemently opposed to the posters being sold, clearly declaring it was unacceptable to make money from them. But we are in a society where everything is for sale: workers, culture, museums, public services, our private lives … it’s hardly a surprise that great symbols like this become nothing more than goods to be sold. We see the same with Che Guevara’s image.” In the spring of 1968, as student protests spread to the Sorbonne and strikes paralysed France, Atelier Populaire produced around 500 different posters reflecting opposition to President Charles de Gaulle, the government, the police, media and capitalism. Printed on newspaper rolls supplied by striking printers, the images were simple but powerful. As the weeks went on they developed a collective style. Gérard Fromanger, an Atelier artist, said in 1988: “We were having great fun, we lived in the school day and night, it was passionate … and we were the only ones working, which was gratifying. The whole country was on strike except us. We never worked so hard in our lives. We were printing day and night.” The École was cleared by police in the early hours of 28 June, 1968. They found a few pots of paint and a handful of posters, but not the secret printing press they were seeking. Georgie Gerrish, of Gerrish Fine Art, who has spent 12 years collecting Atelier Populaire posters, says their message is still relevant. “Everyone is realising how historically important they are. They are from a magic moment full of hope and the idea that if we pulled together we could bring about monumental change. I suppose it does seem strange selling them, but we are now 50 years on, and perhaps the motives for not selling them are not so strong.” Guénolé, a strong supporter of the ongoing wave of public sector strikes in France, said their sale is “sacrilege”. He added: “If you consider the values they represent, then selling one of these posters for £2,000 is a misuse of something sacred. And their messages are relevant today, so much so I am using them to make a point about today’s protests.”
3||How does it feel to be a woman today? It's like living in the Twilight ZoneThe Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. You would think that after a man killed multiple people because he didn’t get the sex he felt entitled to, that no one would take his ideas about women and sex seriously. Enter male pundits, who for some reason felt it totally appropriate to pontificate on whether “redistributing sex” for the poor lonely men who can’t get any is a good idea. It’s hard to describe what it feels like to be a woman in this culture right now – it’s bad enough policy-wise, but then we have the nightmare of men getting paid to treat our lives and bodies like thought experiments. Should women be hanged for having abortions? Should we have a government policy that forces women to have sex with people they don’t want to? It’s like living in the Twilight Zone. I would hate to think that only women should write about issues that affect us, but men are not doing such a stellar job lately of convincing me otherwise. Glass half full A racist tried to rip up a protest sign and … it didn’t go well. Have watched this at least five times. What I’m RTing Who I’m reading Teddy Wayne with some satirical (but familiar) suggestions for future White House correspondents’ dinner jokes; Moira Donegan on sexual entitlement; Elizabeth Segran on working moms’ worries on having a second child; and Irin Carmon with Amy Brittain on the systemic failure around the allegations against Charlie Rose. What I’m ordering Roxane Gay has an anthology that’s just come out called Not That Bad: Dispatches from Rape Culture. I can’t say I’m looking forward to reading it, but I know it will be brilliant and necessary. How outraged I am The Trump administration is pushing a policy that would essentially be a domestic gag rule – barring doctors who receive Title X funding from even mentioning the word abortion. On a scale of one to 10, I’m at a 15. How I’m making it through this week This goat working up his courage is a salve to my soul.
9||Meet the ancestors… the two brothers creating lifelike figures of early manIdentical twins with a combined age of 102, Adrie and Alfons Kennis are among Europe’s most sought-after – and controversial – hominid palaeo-artists: sculptors of lifesize reconstructions of early humans. Working from a studio in their home town of Arnhem in the Netherlands, the brothers bring a surplus of exuberance to their creations, which are richly animated, expressive and – how better to put it? – human, even when they aren’t quite human. “If we have to make a reconstruction,” says Adrie, “we always want it to be a fascinating one, not some dull white dummy that’s just come out of the shower.” In the 10 or so full-sized reconstructions completed during their career they have run the gamut of human history, from “Lucy” – the earliest known hominin fossil – to Homo erectus, Neanderthal man and, of course, Homo sapiens. Just last week, they put the finishing touches to a model for St Fagans National Museum of History in Wales. Due to be unveiled in October, it will be the third Kennis &amp; Kennis work on display in the UK. The process is exhausting. First, they rebuild the skeleton, sometimes using fossils from several different sites, with the help of computer scans and 3D printing. The skeleton is suspended with wire cables and the spine is made flexible using silicone cartilage between the vertebrae. “We use a kind of paraffin wax clay to sculpt the muscles,” says Adrie, “and we make arteries using small ropes which lie over the muscles.” Layers of another clay are then wrapped around the sculpture as skin, and a mould is made to replicate the sculpture in silicone. “We do five layers of silicone to make the skin colour,” explains Adrie, “because real skin is translucent.” To achieve the remarkable accuracy and individuality of each of their sculptures, the Kennis brothers draw deeply from two reservoirs of inspiration. First, they are students of the science behind human anatomy and evolution, constantly educating themselves about the relative merits of the human and Neanderthal pelvis, and painstakingly rebuilding skeletons and musculature for each new sculpture. Fortunately for them, their career has coincided with huge leaps in DNA testing, allowing them to accurately recreate genetic traits such as hair type and eye colour. (Earlier this year, a heated political debate broke out after a Kennis model portrayed the earliest Briton, known as Cheddar Man, with dark skin.) Second, they are keen amateur anthropologists, and their sculptures are influenced as much by modern tribal peoples as they are by the fossilised skulls of their actual subjects. By studying people from more isolated or primitive societies, the brothers believe they can see through a window into the past. “They live outdoors, with completely different rules from ours. If you see pictures of the Tehuelche people of Patagonia, they walk nearly naked in snow. They have totally adapted to those conditions. And if you imagine going much further back in time, imagine how different those people would be…” For this reason, Kennis models often exhibit unique hairstyles and tribal tattoos, and strike poses that appear startlingly modern, provoking strong reactions. “We bring it to the museum, and many times the museum directors are shocked, because they find it too extreme, too alien.” This alien-ness is tempered, however, by their particular skill for facial expressions, giving life and personality to the clay. Each full-sized reconstruction takes half a year, but a face alone can take a whole month, and although the brothers refuse to refer to themselves as artists, this is obviously the area that gives them the greatest artistic freedom and satisfaction. “There are some things the skull can’t tell you,” admits Adrie. “You never know how much fat someone had around their eyes, or the thickness of the lips, or the exact position and shape of the nostrils.” This personal quality is what makes Kennis models so captivating, and so desirable to museums: they don’t simply depict a generalised early man, but a specific man or woman, an effect that allows onlookers to glimpse human prehistory with immediacy, even familiarity. But while curators and museum-goers are sometimes surprised by the vivid, emotive features of the Kennis models, there is only one person Adrie needs to impress: “If Alfons doesn’t like the face, I am disappointed. But if he likes it, if we are both satisfied, then we can handle the whole world.” Homo sapiens and Neanderthal side by side (pictured at top of article) Natural History Museum, London These two reconstructions demonstrate the differences between an early human – in this case taken from a Czech fossil – and his distant relative the Neanderthal, reconstructed from Belgian remains. “We made them as a pair, to compare,” says Kennis. “That’s why they are in a relaxed pose, never a cliched hunting or making-fire pose, because then you can’t see the anatomical differences between them.” For the same reasons, the models are unclothed. “We like to keep them naked because then you can see the features clearly: the Neanderthals were short with big hands and a broad pelvis, the first Homo sapiens were very slender.” This has been another source of controversy in the brothers’ work. “Chris Stringer, the head of anthropology at the NHM, gets emails all the time, usually from fathers, saying it’s scandalous that his daughter had to see a naked guy in the museum. It’s always parents that make the problems Cheddar Man Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom “Cheddar Man”, Britain’s oldest complete skeleton, was a mesolithic hunter-gatherer living around 10,000 years ago. Kennis and Kennis made the reconstructed head for a Channel 4 documentary earlier this year, using the skull found in Cheddar Gorge in 1903. Contrary to previous assumptions, DNA analysis revealed that Cheddar Man had dark skin and wavy hair, and the model was met with some controversy. “Many people were surprised by his dark skin,” says Kennis, “but for us, it was not a big surprise. At least three other hunter-gatherer skeletons have been found in Europe from around the same time, and DNA tests show they all have that strange combination of dark skin and blue eyes.” Neanderthal woman and child Gibraltar Museum This pair of Neanderthals, commissioned by the Gibraltar Museum in 2016, display the Kennises’ commitment to marrying scientific accuracy with human characteristics. “When we put the skeletons together,” recalls Adrie, “we used two life models standing for us. The child model happened to put her arms around her grandmother, and the grandmother’s face was suddenly so proud – proud of her granddaughter. It was such a nice idea, the woman looking proud while the child hangs around her waist.” Not much is known about the Neanderthal sense of community, but Kennis imagines a civilised species: “Neanderthals were quite modern. In la Sima de las Las Palomas [a Neanderthal cave in southern Spain] they were found buried, aligned together, with a panther claw on their chests. They had some art, they had bigger brains than us; I think the Neanderthal community was not so different from [that of] Homo sapiens.” Early European man from Peştera cu Oase, Romania Neanderthal Museum, Mettmann, Germany “This is the first western European Homo sapiens,” says Kennis, “reconstructed from the skull of a young adult, about 34,000 years old.” At this point in prehistory, humans had migrated to Europe from Africa via the Middle East, and Neanderthals had only recently become extinct. “Modern humans [those who left Africa around 70,000 years ago] have up to 4% Neanderthal DNA, but this man has about 9%. His ancestors had bred with Neanderthals only six generations before.” As is often the case with Kennis &amp; Kennis, the sculpture has raised curious questions about race. “If you ask people to pinpoint what continent he comes from, people say such different things,” says Kennis. “But he actually comes from Romania.” Ötzi the iceman South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology, Bolzano, Italy, 2011 More recent than most of Kennis &amp; Kennis’s subjects, Ötzi lived in the Tyrolese mountains 5-6,000 years ago, during the copper age. Because his body was mummified in ice, much more can be deciphered about his physiognomy and lifestyle. “He was 45, which is quite old,” says Adrie, “and he was very sick when he died, with stomach problems. His skull has an underbite, and his face points downwards: not a pretty face. Some people who see the reconstruction say: ‘Wow! It’s good!’ because he looks like shepherds who live high in the mountains and spend their lives out of doors.” Not everyone, however, was so thrilled with the Kennis version of Ötzi. “We did some research around the village where he was found, and many people thought he was young and handsome – a Johnny Weissmuller kind of guy. You should have seen how disappointed they were when they saw our reconstruction.”
18||Kamasi Washington review – spiritual sax that packs a punchIs spiritual jazz pop music? It is now. One of the most intriguing consequences of the civic shocks and political divisions of the past few years has been a widespread hunger for more meaningful cultural output, and an enthusiastic uptake of sounds rising to the occasion. Even five years ago, the idea that a tenor saxophonist clad in a dashiki – the roomy tunic favoured by some west African men, and LA jazz man-mountain Kamasi Washington – might find his dense, maximalist triple albums high up in the pop year-end lists would have given observers pause. And yet, in 2015, it happened with Washington’s much-feted solo debut, The Epic. Although technically inspired by a dream of Washington’s, the title of the first track from that record, Change of the Guard, declared the new consciousness being ushered in, one that wed vintage Afro-futurism and a commitment to transcendence with a fresh urgency in what many were calling a new civil rights era. Tonight, there are shouts of recognition when Washington and his band load up: an introductory military rat-tat-tat from the two drummers, a flurry of electric piano, some high-speed upright bass, and nought-to-sixty breathwork from Kamasi and the more languid Ryan Porter on trombone. No one is playing themselves in: this band of long-time associates (many of them childhood friends; and, later, Washington’s father, Rickey Washington) just flick a switch. Endowed with the lung-power of a cetacean, Washington can clearly dragoon his alveoli at will; the sax looks vulnerable in his hands. Silver-booted vocalist Patrice Quinn is tucked behind a plastic sound barrier as much for her own safety as to better hear herself. From this sci-fi pod, she invokes the universe with her hands and intones heroic snatches of the bigger chorales that fill this track in its recorded version. The Roundhouse is putty in Washington’s mitts. Last month, Washington wowed Coachella, the California pop festival – alongside Beyoncé and Cardi B. Next month, he releases a mere double album, one side entitled Earth (dealing with lived reality) and the other, Heaven (creating one’s own reality). Tonight, Washington plays three tracks from it: two teased online, and one – The Psalmnist – a live debut, a restless workout that nods to the 70s. One of the reasons Washington has resonated so loudly outside jazz is due to his fine missionary work on rapper Kendrick Lamar’s jazz-inflected 2015 hip-hop album, To Pimp a Butterfly (he also contributed to 2017’s Pulitzer-winning Damn); another is that Washington is such a welcoming musician. While rigorous, his atmospheres are inclusive, not elitist; you get the feeling this band leader is more of a shepherd, not an ego with airbags. There’s a willingness, too, to draw on non-jazz forms, like the 70s fusions and 80s funk that unfurl, just a little too often, from keyboard player Brandon Coleman (“the only person I know who is more into space than I am,” says Washington, “I go outside to look at the stars and he’s been there for 15 minutes”), or the Latin rhythms that punctuate certain passages. Bits of Heaven and Earth are, however, among Washington’s most outward-facing works yet. Most rallying of all is Fists of Fury, which covers the theme to Bruce Lee’s 1972 movie of that name. (“I know it doesn’t look like it,” notes Washington, with just-so comic timing, “but I like kung fu.”) Until now, Washington’s music has provided uplift and forbearance. But he’s had enough. Coleman loops Washington’s opening stabs of sax and unleashes some blaxsploitation-era cinematic piano, and Quinn lets 2018 have it. “When I’m faced with unjust injury/Then I change my hands/To fists of fury,” she seethes. The track mounts, with the horn players eventually giving way to the percussionists trading phrases so physical that drummer Tony Austin’s shades fly off. Washington has spoken of how Stravinsky’s The Rite Of Spring has inspired him; this is a track that also deserves a riot. It doesn’t quite get one in here in Camden. As rousing as Fists of Fury is, the heart of tonight’s performance sits in a more philosophical place – the final track from last year’s splendid EP, Harmony of Difference, in which Washington played with variations on motifs, uniting them all on Truth. This rendition benefits from one more horn: the sax of Shabaka Hutchings, leading light of the recent upswell in British jazz. The four players come together, fall apart, Washington’s more lyrical playing contrasting with Hutchings’s emphatic tone; the theme passed from horns to keyboards and back again, after the rhythm section detour to Africa. This is generous, collaborative musicianship, on a track that emphasises how difference should be celebrated, not tolerated; peak Kamasi is achieved.
1||Tully review – perceptive take on the woes of motherhoodThere are certain truths about new motherhood that are unassailable. Things that lodge themselves in your psyche as permanently as the butternut squash stain on your last halfway decent T-shirt. The bone-deep exhaustion. The uneasy combination of anxiety and boredom. The pressure to bring sexy back when it feels like someone has driven a combine harvester through your nethers. All of which this latest collaboration between writer Diablo Cody and director Jason Reitman nails with harrowing accuracy. It’s not exactly new territory. But what makes Tully such a tragicomic triumph compared with the brittle perkiness of films like I Don’t Know How She Does It (2011) and the god-awful Motherhood (2009) is that the film is not afraid to mine some pretty dark thematic territory. This is thanks largely to a towering performance from Charlize Theron as Marlo, mother of three, including a newborn. Theron has perfected the dead-eyed gaze of a woman who can’t quite work out where motherly love ends and Stockholm syndrome begins. Baby weight and cupcake panic are tag-teaming to smother any spark of life she once had. Then Marlo cracks, and calls the night nanny for whom her wealthy brother has paid as a gift. Enter millennial Mary Poppins, Tully (Mackenzie Davis), an unflappable free spirit who effortlessly shoulders the burden of motherhood. Marlo’s connection with her nanny is sudden and profound: Tully is like a window into her own past self. The wistful, sometimes melancholic tone of this rueful examination of parenthood doesn’t blunt the edges of Cody’s acutely perceptive writing. And it is perhaps no coincidence that Reitman, who seemed tonally unmoored with his last two films – Men, Women &amp; Children and Labor Day – returns to the incisive form last exhibited with Young Adult, his previous collaboration with Cody and Theron. Tully is emotionally complex, bleakly funny and only slightly depressing.
18||One to watch: Sassy 009If you’re in need of a soundtrack to your summer crush – or just a song to have a summer crush on – consider Norwegian trio Sassy 009’s Pretty Baby, a pulsing, sensual track that, according to the band, “flirts with being obsessed with someone without knowing what you’re attracted to”. The three – Teodora, Sunniva and Johanna – went to school together in Oslo, and although they joked to i-D that “our first impressions of each other were: ‘Basic b*tch, I would never play in a band with her!’’’, they nonetheless ended up crafting dance tracks using a pirated verson of Logic Pro X, their voices and, incongruously, Johanna’s flute playing. Named after Sunniva’s SoundCloud profile name, they have an improvised feel in the best possible sense, a playful looseness. There is also, considering the small number of tracks they’ve released to date (Pretty Baby was followed by debut EP Do You Mind in November), a pleasing breadth to their sound, from spoken-word reverb-y darkness of Summin’ You Up to the dreaminess of Are You Leaving, which steals the flute solo back from prog with aplomb. They’re currently working on their debut album. Before that, you can catch them at the Great Escape and Field Day festivals – but it looks like it’s going to be more than a summer fling. The Great Escape, Brighton, 17-19 May; Field Day, London, 1-2 June.
1||Meet the new double act of French cinemaTwo years ago, a striking image appeared on the April 2016 cover of the esteemed French film magazine Cahiers du Cinéma. It was of a young woman with red hair swept across her forehead in unkempt strands, and a cartoonish curly moustache etched in eyeliner on her upper lip, with the caption, “Cinéma Français: Vive les Excentriques!” The picture, illustrating a feature on a tradition of oddballs in French film, was from Jeune Femme, a feature in the works from a new female director, Léonor Serraille. The film itself didn’t emerge for a whole year after that, but when it premiered in Cannes last May, Jeune Femme lived up to the advance exposure. Audiences loved it, the film won the Caméra d’Or for best debut feature, and critics raved about the positively nuclear performance of its lead, Laetitia Dosch. She plays Paula, a woman whose older boyfriend has abruptly dumped her. Paula begins the film raging at him through the locked door of his Paris apartment block, bashes her head against the door, then further vents her spleen at the medic tending her forehead. At least she’s free now, he suggests: “Freedom’s for egotistical pricks!” she spits back. Described this way, Jeune Femme could sound harrowing; but while it has its dark moments, it’s extremely funny and, yes, certainly eccentric. The Cahiers cover pic shows Paula at a fancy dress party that she’s gatecrashed by wrapping her hair around the inside of a toilet roll and going as Amy Winehouse. The moustache turns up later as an unexplained addition. Much of the publicity around the film has pitched Serraille, 32, and Dosch, 37, as a duo, effectively as adoptive sisters: one photo has them in matching red polo necks, striking identical poses. They were supposed to operate as a team when they came to London in last month, but when I arrived to interview them at a central London hotel, I found a nervous Serraille watching the clock, as she had to return to Paris early; meanwhile, Dosch hadn’t arrived because her Eurostar was held up. In the end they barely got to say hello as they crossed paths in the lobby: a farcical setup they could use if they ever make a sequel, Jeunes Femmes. They immediately strike you as complementary opposites. Dosch turns up in a loose, hippy-ish red top and speaks fast and raucously, occasionally bursting into spontaneous laughter. Serraille, in contrast, has a high, quiet voice, wears tight black and sits hunched, with her arms wrapped round herself. It’s only after a while that I notice she is several months pregnant; she’s expecting a second child, having given birth to a daughter four months after shooting the film. Serraille is so completely unlike Paula that of course you can’t help asking whether, on some level, the character really is her. “Paula’s like my double in reverse,” Serraille laughs. “That’s what was exciting. I only realised once the film was out that I’d created a character who’s the total opposite of me, and the way I approach life and people. I’m a lot more introverted, so writing the film was a sort of liberation.” Nevertheless, she and Paula have experiences in common – not the breakup, not the living in cheap hotels, but certainly the frustrating episodes of employment, notably as a babysitter and as an assistant on an underwear counter. “I worked for a very big lingerie brand in a massive knicker outlet,” says Serraille, who – like Paula – got the gig after having to enthuse fulsomely in her job interview. “The bigger the lies, the better it goes down. Who cares about the brand? You just want a basic wage, but they want to hear, ‘I’m passionate about the product’, all that crap… I needed to turn it into comedy, because at the time it was hard going.” Also hard going was Serraille’s initial experience of Paris. Originally from Lyon, she moved to the capital at 18 and studied comparative literature at the Sorbonne, later enlisting at La Fémis, the city’s prestigious film school. In the film Paula complains: “Paris is a city that doesn’t like people”, and the young Serraille felt the same way. “Every door was shut; you had to fight all the time,” she says. “It made me feel that the city didn’t want anything to do with me – but that can also give you a certain strength.” When Serraille wrote Jeune Femme, she didn’t have anyone in mind to play Paula, but felt that it shouldn’t be a known face. Then she remembered seeing Dosch. Before making a mark as the lead in Justine Triet’s 2013 comedy Age of Panic, the French-Swiss performer had worked across a range of theatre and dance, with experimental Spanish choreographer La Ribot and writing and directing her own shows. Dosch turned out to be exactly who Serraille was looking for: “I felt that she was at once totally the character, and not the character at all. When I write a script, I can be a bit precious, so I need someone who’ll come in and blow the whole thing apart.” Overall, the film was tightly scripted, but Dosch has a few moments of inspired improvisation. She prepared for the role partly by walking around the city in character. “I wanted to know how she looked at people,” she says. “She’s like an animal alone in Paris, like a rat or something. She looks straight at people a bit too much. I wanted people to think, ‘Who is she? Has she just stolen something?’ I trained myself to look suspicious!” says Dosch, and bursts into a huge, throaty laugh. It sounds a bit like the way David Thewlis turned himself into the outsider, Johnny, in Mike Leigh’s Naked. “Yes, he’s ‘un peu cockroach’,” Dosch says, mixing her languages. “I wanted Paula to have a touch of cockroach too.” What she and Serraille didn’t want was for Paula to be – in English again – “too ‘wacky girl’.” Wacky like Greta Gerwig in Noah Baumbach’s Frances Ha, to which Jeune Femme has widely been compared? “C’est ça,” says Dosch. “I don’t like that film too much.” Serraille isn’t a fan of the film either, although she admires Gerwig’s acting. “There are too many movie references in it, and things work out too easily for the character – life’s not like that.” Nothing works too easily for Paula, that’s for certain, including her relations with women – like the ostensibly chummy young mother who hires her as a babysitter. “It’s that whole thing of: ‘Oh, we’re women – we’ll get on very well – oh no, actually we won’t, because you’re my employee’,” says Serraille. “I wanted to show that things can go badly among women too.” But most of all, Paula has to endure some grisly men – one who paws her at a party, laying on the bogus sensitivity. “You’ve been crying. That touches me,” he simpers. “Go and touch yourself!” she snaps back. You might say Jeune Femme is slightly ahead of its time, as its Cannes premiere came five months before the Weinstein revelations: Paula’s experience, and her response to it, makes this a perfect film for the #MeToo era. “All I know,” says Serraille, “is that I needed this woman to be able to take care of herself whatever happened. There’s a message there: that even if everything’s broken, you can rebuild it again. It’s important for women and men to be able to feel that. “But it’s true that, given everything that’s happened since, I now read the film differently. I know a lot of women who have never been beaten or raped, but feel comfortable being in a state of submission to men. The thing about Paula is that she chooses to leave her comfort zone. She chooses discomfort.” While not a huge commercial success domestically, Jeune Femme has put Dosch and Serraille on the map, together and separately. Serraille is working on the script for her next film, although she hasn’t yet decided which project to commit herself to – it will be either a study of a male character, or a thriller; she’s also co-writing the directing debut of Jeune Femme’s cinematographer Emilie Noblet. As for Dosch, British audiences will see her in October when she comes to the Barbican theatre, London, in an adaptation of Marguerite Duras’s novella La Maladie de la Mort, directed by Katie Mitchell and reworked by playwright Alice Birch. She also has another personal project in the works. “I’m writing a play called Hate – or it could be Hâte in French [meaning “haste”]. A woman is naked on stage with a horse, and she wants to have a child with it. There are songs, poems, the horse speaks…” Dosch bursts out laughing again. On her crowdfunding page, she describes Hate as “a crazy project for crazy times.” Vive les excentriques, quoi. Jeune Femme is released on 18 May
14||London Bridge closed after man falls into ThamesLondon Bridge was closed on Saturday morning after the driver of a suspected stolen van fell into the river Thames. The man was rescued from the water and treated by paramedics at the scene. He was arrested on suspicion of theft of a motor vehicle and taken to hospital, where he remains. Police were called out at around 8am after a report that a van had been stolen and was seen heading in the direction of London Bridge. The bridge was closed as local officers, the Marine Policing Unit, the Coastguard and London ambulance service dealt with the situation. A witness said on Twitter that the man jumped, rather than fell, into the river. No one else was injured and the incident was not being treated as terrorism related, police confirmed. A spokeswoman for the Metropolitan police said: “The van collided with a number of vehicles including a bus before the driver made off on foot. “The driver, a man, fell into the river Thames from London Bridge. He is under arrest on suspicion of theft of a motor vehicle and is in hospital.” She said officers were still at the scene but the bridge had been reopened.
8||Iraq-born refugee could become first Arabic speaker to head Britain’s JewsThe most influential organisation representing British Jews could soon have its first leader from a Mizrahi – or Arab – background. Edwin Shuker, one of four candidates campaigning to be the next president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews, was born in Baghdad before fleeing persecution and arriving in Britain as a refugee. Shuker, whose first language is Arabic, says the board, which has played a crucial role in recent controversies about antisemitism in Britain, must be more diverse and inclusive, and is in urgent need of a change of culture to pay more attention to grassroots concerns within the community. “I want to be a voice for the community, and the authority of that voice comes from carrying all parts of the community, their concerns and aspirations, with you,” he told the Observer. Shuker was born into a dwindling Jewish community in Iraq in 1955. Amid rising tensions in 1971 he escaped with his parents, grandmother and two sisters through the Kurdish mountains into Iran before coming to the UK as a United Nations refugee. He later lived in Israel for six years. He said his bond with the Middle East was “total and continuing”: “My identity is as a Jew from Arabia, and an Arabic and Hebrew speaker.” Acknowledging that his background could be a challenge in next Sunday’s election, he said: “It would be a huge cultural step for British Jewry to accept an oriental with a foreign accent to be their president. But I hope we are mature enough for that.” Shuker praised the actions of Jonathan Arkush, the BoD’s current president, who has joined forces with the Jewish Leadership Council to forcefully tackle Jeremy Corbyn over antisemitism in the Labour party. “When Jews stand together, we are a powerful force, and that has been demonstrated in recent weeks. But I don’t want our brilliant, creative, vibrant community to be defined by antisemitism or by our enemies.” There were issues of great importance at grassroots level in the community, such as the inclusion of women and the challenges of an ageing community, he said. “We need to use the example of the antisemitism campaign to demonstrate how much clearer our voice is when we leave our differences behind. There are people who feel their voice is not heard and their presence is irrelevant. I want to change that culture.” The BoD leadership was “top down, and I want to make it bottom up,” he said. “We need to listen and unite, and not only when the community is facing an outside danger, but also on issues that are just as important to the welfare of British Jews but aren’t getting as much attention.” The current campaign against antisemitism in the Labour party was of critical importance, “but I don’t think it can be sustained with such intensity in the long term. We need to look beyond the next headline to other methods of combating antisemitism, such as education in schools. “We need to build alliances with as wide a range of British society as possible – political parties, Christian, Muslim and other faith communities – against every form of racism. Let’s use this crisis as an opportunity to root out any attack on religion, gender and so on.” He said criticism of the actions of the Israeli government was legitimate, but that the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement “crosses a red line” into antisemitism because it sought to delegitimise the state of Israel itself. There were individuals within the UK Jewish community who took issue with Israeli government policies and actions, he said. But it was the job of the BoD president to represent the whole community, and it would be inappropriate for the leadership to publicly criticise Israel. There are four candidates in the BoD election.
16||Alastair Campbell berates Labour over local election resultsThe former Labour spin doctor Alastair Campbell has hit out at the state of the party after this week’s local elections. Tony Blair’s former adviser said in a speech that “huge swathes of the country” could not accept the current party in power. “If we cannot beat this shambles of a Tory party, we don’t deserve to be in the game,” he told the centre-left pressure group Progress. Defending his comments on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme he hit out at the Momentum movement, which backs Jeremy Corbyn, for celebrating results that suggested neither Labour nor the Tories could break the electoral deadlock that delivered a hung parliament last June. “We are really clutching at straws,” he said. “If I see one more person from the Momentum side saying: ‘These are the best results since 1971’. What planet are they on? These are bad results. “You’re talking here about the government, which is possibly the worst government in living memory. You’ve had Windrush, you’ve had Grenfell, you’ve had the Brexit negotiations going from bad to worse, you’ve had the National Health Service under more pressure than it’s been for a long, long time, serial incompetence day after day after day, yet the public do not seem in nearly sufficient numbers remotely interested in supporting the Labour party.” Campbell, who backs a referendum on the terms of the Brexit deal, said Labour should not be seen as supporting Theresa May’s plans for leaving the EU. Referencing a Blair-era soundbite, Campbell said Labour should be “tough on Brexit, tough on the causes of Brexit”, fighting against the UK’s departure from the EU while addressing the concerns of those who voted to leave. He said that if Labour’s Brexit tests were to mean anything the party could not support May’s strategy. “If they do, then though the Tories will be seen as Brexit’s architect, Labour will be its bricklayer, and history is harsh when the house comes tumbling down,” he said. “My Labour tribalism is being pushed to the limit by the return of militant-style nastiness in local politics, by my revulsion that any antisemitism has been allowed to fester, by the feeling that some in the leadership and their supporters feel much greater animus against other Labour supporters than against Tories.”
22||Sheridan Smith to cast new light on lives of porn actresses in hard-hitting dramaSheridan Smith is to star in a hard-hitting drama about British porn, aiming to shine a forensic light on issues of power and consent in a controversial but lucrative industry. Adult Material, a four-part drama written for Channel 4 by the award-winning playwright Lucy Kirkwood, will tell the story of an adult entertainment star Jolene Dollar, played by 36-year-old Smith. It begins filming next year. “It’s a series I’ve wanted to make for a long time because I think the porn industry is a really interesting environment through which to look at power and how we behave in the workplace,” Kirkwood told the Observer. “It’s not a simple subject and I found the grey areas, such as the fact that it’s one of the few workplaces where women earn more than men and one of the few industries that allows women to juggle work and childcare demands, really fascinating.” Jolene is a mother of three who has built a two-decade career in the industry. “She’s not quite Jenna Jameson, but she has a following,” Kirkwood explained, referring to the prolific American star known as “the queen of porn”. Jolene finds her world turned upside down after coming into contact with a younger woman, Amy, an aspiring dancer who turns to porn while recovering from an injury. “I wanted to look at the way the industry has changed in recent years – there’s a very high turnover of actors working very intensely over a short period now, and that obviously has had a seismic effect,” Kirkwood said. “Jolene considers herself a very maternal person, not only to her own children but also in the way she looks after other women on set, and one of the things that the series considers is how women take care of other women and the culture of complicity and silence that can occur. What it means if you fail to stand up for someone or listen to them when they tell you what has occurred. “It’s also not a straightforward series. The quality of writing on television these days means that you can’t deal in cardboard cutouts. I wanted people to be sympathetic to these characters, but for questions to also be raised.” Smith was always the first choice to play Jolene. “I just think she’s extraordinary – I’ve worked with her before [on Kirkwood’s first professional play Tinderbox in 2008] and have the most enormous crush on her. She’s like an old-school movie star,” Kirkwood said. “In the beginning I worried that she was a bit young for the role, but I also found it hard to imagine anyone else having her combination of soul and really precise technique. The character of Jolene is fairly informed by her, so like Sheridan she’s warm and rude and funny and sharp.” Kirkwood, whose plays Chimerica and The Children have won multiple awards, researched the subject by talking to industry performers and directors as well as feminist anti-porn campaigners. The writer has a reputation for tackling difficult subjects, from geopolitics and particle physics to sex trafficking, and stressed that the industry’s darker side wouldn’t be ignored. “It’s a subject about which I have all manner of feelings,” she said. “It’s easy to just get angry about porn and the way in which it affects lives, but I don’t think it’s very helpful to simply dismiss another woman’s lived experience in that way. “It’s one thing to sit in a bar and argue abstractly about how porn affects us and quite another to talk to a woman whose life this is. I wanted to look at that sympathetically but not softly. I don’t think this is a subject that you can simply take a single strident position on. There’s a lot to be said about how porn is the product of a capitalist mindset and will always have people who, out of necessity or out of choice, are willing to provide it.” The series is sure to draw comparisons with The Deuce, a period piece by David Simon, the creator of The Wire, about the growth of the porn industry in New York in the 70s, although Kirkwood stressed that she had a slightly different focus in mind. “I really admire the way in which The Deuce focuses on the economy and the way in which it drives the porn industry and it’s interesting how little has really changed in the most basic sense once you remove the changes in technology,” she said. “But in some senses comparing the British porn industry to the American porn industry is like comparing the British film industry to Hollywood. There’s a sense that it’s less mechanised and more of a cottage industry in Britain and I wanted to reflect that.” Most of all though she hopes that Adult Material will force audiences to look at the industry in a fresh way. “It’s a story about women navigating their way through a difficult and constantly changing world and I hope that if anyone is dismissive of porn actresses at the beginning then they will reconsider that by the end,” she said. “What I would love is for everyone to feel that the industry has been fairly represented, but also that watching it you have been pushed into areas that you might not always want to go.”
7||TV chef Lorraine Pascale: how I eatBreakfast I make a protein shake and drink half when I get up at 5.30am and the rest of it after the gym at 8.30am. I put turmeric, matcha, maca, spirulina and bimuno (a prebiotic) in a blender and blitz it with water and berries. I also add black pepper, because otherwise the turmeric won’t be absorbed. I don’t need coffee – I’m pretty awake from all the powders. Lunch I try to eat a Mediterranean diet. If I’m at home, I’ll fry chicken sprinkled with turmeric, black pepper, oil, chia seeds and black sesame seeds, and have it with kale, blueberries, raspberries and strawberries, and a honey-and-mustard dressing. If I’m busy, I’ll order a Deliveroo from Comptoir Libanais or Squirrel, where you can build your own salad. I like the crayfish and avocado sandwich from Pret, but there’s never enough crayfish so I have to buy two. I’m over sandwiches. Snacks I always have red grapes and berries with me on the go; I have to eat all the time. I get cravings for salt-and-vinegar chipsticks from the Boots Shapers range. At the hairdresser’s, I’ll eat the sweets from the bowl on the counter. And I love a bag of Revels. I like not knowing what I’m going to get, although I learned last week that the toffee ones always sink to the bottom. Dinner I don’t like cooking every night. And now that my daughter Ella, 21, has left home, I’m back in student mode. I’ll pop to M&amp;S and get something I can throw together, like organic salmon or chicken with kale and rocket. I don’t like broccoli, but I eat it because it’s good for you. I’m quite vegetarian by default, so I’ll make a chilli sin carne or veggie thai burgers. My favourite places to eat out are Roka or Nobu for black cod, rock shrimp tempura and lychee martinis. I like the cheese trolley for dessert: anything blue and strong. Lorraine Pascale co-presents Spring Baking Championship on Food Network. Series three starts 14 May.
4||Hello purple, bye bamboo: what's hot and what's not in horticultureBlooming Purple reign The Pantone colour of the year, ultraviolet, works brilliantly with many others and is robust enough to cope with brave combinations (purple and orange, say). There’s still time to plant tubers of the cactus-flowered Dahlia ‘Purple Gem’ or, for purple foliage, Heuchera ‘Forever Purple’ or ‘Frosted Violet’. For climbers, there are many violet clematis, but I like the compact ‘Edda’, which is ideal for containers. Local landscaping There is a move to source hard landscaping from local materials, which cuts down on transport miles and gives a sense of place. Materials that feel earthy and raw, such as copper and bronze, are having a moment, says designer Charlotte Harris. Source it ethically by searching salvage and reclamation yards and sites such as Freegle and Gumtree. Asymmetrical paving Crazy paving, which emerged in a couple of Chelsea flower show gardens last year, is back again, now as a fully-fledged trend. The key is to choose quality materials. It’s eco-friendly, too: it allows you to use materials that would otherwise be deemed damaged. Shrubs Prairie grasses may look fabulous in summer, but without some structure they’re pretty drab come November. That’s where shrubs come in: container-grown shrubs can be planted at any time and add instant interest to a border. Mexican orange blossom (Choisya × dewitteana ‘Aztec Pearl’) has evergreen, glossy foliage and fragrant, white flowers in spring, and copes with most aspects other than deep shade. Osmanthus x burkwoodii is another canny evergreen, with masses of scented, white flowers in spring; it can do well in shade, although you may not get as many flowers. Both can be clipped into hedges or left to maintain a more natural outline. Smart tech It’s now possible to connect everything to our smartphones – from plant sensors to speakers. Hozelock’s Cloud Controller allows you to tweak your watering regime via an app – attach the controller to your outdoor tap, then hook up your sprinkler or irrigation system. No more wilting plants in midsummer, or wasting water when it’s not needed. Garden tech is becoming more affordable, too, putting products such as robotic mowers within reach for some. The Robomow RX12U is marketed for smaller lawns and costs £499. Fading Box A twin-pronged attack by blight and moths is killing off topiary shapes and hedges all over the country. People are moving away from tightly clipped, formal shapes towards a looser look, using multistemmed trees. Nevertheless, the search for a suitable box alternative is under way; RHS Garden Wisley in Surrey is testing 25 plants for topiary in its walled garden, including Berberis darwinii ‘Compacta’, Lonicera nitida ‘Baggesen’s Gold’ and Pittosporum ‘Collaig Silver’. Plastic When Monty Don speaks, gardeners listen, so his announcement on Gardeners’ World this spring that he is cutting back on plastic has had a big impact on horticulture. Gardening’s dirty secret is that, like most areas of life, single-use plastic dominates, from sacks for compost to plant labels. The Horticultural Trades Association has launched a takeback scheme for plastic plant pots and trays for its members, so many garden centres should now accept your old plastic, but it is better to avoid buying them in the first place. Bamboo Yes, there are non-invasive bamboos that clump rather than run, but gardeners are often poorly advised at garden centres, and end up planting types that start popping up in the lawn and romping through the flowerbeds. Plus, for bamboo to look its best, it needs plenty of room to show off, something most of us don’t have. Posh planters Modernist, monochrome, shiny containers have had their day: instead, embrace materials that weather and blend in with the space, such as wood, terracotta and galvanised steel. You could call this a British conversion to the Japanese principle of wabi-sabi, which fosters an appreciation of how materials change over time, or just a realisation that high-gloss planters make your garden look like the patio at your local pizza restaurant. If you prefer to recycle, consider repurposing a salvaged water tank or chimney pot. Manicured lawns Not only does a lawn studded with buttercups, daisies, bugle and self-heal look pretty, it also provides a source of nectar and pollen. Either leave it to grow long and carve a path or two through with the mower, or just cut back on your mowing regime by a few days to give the flowers a chance. Sow in some microclover, and you will find the lawn stays greener during dry spells, too. And that bit of moss under the tree? That’s probably because that spot is just not suitable for a thick, green sward of grass. Just remember the adage, “If it’s green, it’s a lawn.”
10||'We're not changing any stories': Trump's week of contradictionThe end of Donald Trump’s week was shaping up nicely, on paper. On Friday afternoon, he was to speak to a group of America’s most ardent gun enthusiasts, a crowd sure to shower him with the kind of mass adulation he finds so gratifying that, 16 months into his presidency, he has never stopped holding campaign rallies stocked with true believers. But Trump’s speaking engagement, at the National Rifle Association’s annual meeting, was in Dallas, and he had to get there first. That meant passing two phalanxes of reporters – one at his helicopter, one at the foot of the steps leading to Air Force One. They were bursting with questions about the whiplash turns of the past week in two of the biggest stories of his presidency, the Robert Mueller investigation and the Stormy Daniels affair. Early in the week, a paraphrased list of 49 questions had been leaked to the press that Mueller, the special counsel investigating alleged collusion between the Trump campaign and Moscow, reportedly wanted to ask the president. The questions focused on whether Trump had obstructed justice by firing the former FBI director James Comey and other acts, and what Trump knew about his campaign’s contacts with Russians. The unwritten question was whether Trump would ever agree to such an interview – and, if he did not, whether Mueller would to try to force him through subpoena. Then Trump’s most freshly recruited lawyer, the former New York City mayor and unashamed Trump cheerleader Rudy Giuliani, went on TV and delivered a bombshell. He said that money used to seal a 2016 hush agreement with the porn actor Stormy Daniels had come from Trump, who had earlier flatly denied, on camera, any knowledge of the $130,000. Confronted on the tarmac at Andrews air force base about the Daniels payment, Trump grew aggressive. “This country right now is running so smooth, and to be bringing up that kind of crap, and to be bringing up witch-hunts all the time, that’s all you want to talk about,” Trump said. But wasn’t he the one who had an alleged extramarital affair with a porn actor, then secretly moved money to pay her not to talk about it right before the election, then said he had no knowledge of the payment, then this week tweeted that non-disclosure agreements “are very common among celebrities and people of wealth”? “We’re not changing any stories,” Trump said. With the tangled vines encircling Trump’s White House growing ever thicker, the president’s path to emerge from the scandals around him becomes increasingly obscure with each passing day. At the same time, the tools at Trump’s disposal to free himself might not be as effective as they once were. Not so long ago, the hiring of Giuliani, a former US attorney and street fighter who goes so far back with Trump that he once dressed in drag and pretended to be molested by him, might have enhanced Trump’s power to take his case to the American public. Instead, on day one, Giuliani, 73, appeared to be having trouble getting up to speed on the foregoing months of lawsuits and contradictory statements that the president’s camp has issued about the Stormy Daniels affair. The former mayor immediately stepped in it, letting slip that Trump had paid his personal lawyer Michael Cohen $35,000 a month in part to meet the payment made to Daniels. That gave the lie to a Trump statement aboard Air Force One on 5 April, when reporters asked him whether he knew where Cohen got the money to pay Daniels. “No, I don’t know,” Trump said. On Friday, Trump blamed Giuliani’s newness in his role as he tried to clear up confusion about the payment – “It’s actually very simple,” Trump said, without explaining how. “Rudy is a great guy, but he just started a day ago,” adding: “He started yesterday. He’ll get his facts straight. He’s a great guy.” “It’s a question of misinterpretation,” Giuliani chimed in in a separate interview, which concluded with a denial that he had lost his place in the president’s affections: “He says he loves me.” Those who would speak for Trump must be willing to ride the narrative tiger, and sometimes to be bitten. Even Sarah Sanders, the counter-attacking White House press secretary, adopted a defensive crouch when she was pressed on Thursday to explain contradictions in the changing White House account of the Stormy Daniels case. “Again, I gave you the best information that I had,” Sanders said, over and over again. While the struggling among Trump’s surrogates to stay on the same page has a slapstick quality, the seriousness of the allegations that Mueller is weighing against Trump lends an air of tragedy to the White House comedy of errors. And downright ominous are the partisan attacks on the rule of law that the president continually deploys in an effort to free himself from his problems. “You have all these investigators; they’re Democrats,” Trump said of the special counsel’s team, some of whom have made campaign donations in the past to Democrats. “In all fairness, Bob Mueller worked for Obama for eight years.” That is not true; Mueller, a lifelong Republican and decorated Vietnam veteran with a reputation as a straight-shooter, spent 12 years as FBI director, overlapping for 4.5 years with Barack Obama and 7.5 years with George W Bush, who appointed him. Comfortable, clearly, in his contradictions, Trump said on Friday that he really wanted to sit for an interview with Mueller to help sort everything out, but his lawyers were counselling against it. “I would love to speak,” Trump said. “I would love to. Nobody wants to speak more than me – in fact, against my lawyers’ – because most lawyers, they never speak on anything. “I would love to speak, because we’ve done nothing wrong. There was no collusion with the Russians. There was nothing. There was no obstruction.” In the convention hall at the NRA meeting in Dallas, Trump got the roaring reaction he had come looking for, as he delivered red-meat lines about freedom and protecting gun rights. But then he lapsed into reflections on his favorite topic: himself. The president bragged about how Kanye West supports him, and claimed his popularity had “doubled” among African Americans as a result. “Kanye West must have some power,” Trump said, and the sea of gun owners cheered.
8||Ruffled feathers: feral peacocks split community in CanadaFor a decade, a group of feral peacocks have divided the community of Sullivan Heights. Some of the residents of this suburban neighbourhood outside Vancouver love the birds, who have taken up residence in the local trees; others say they are kept awake by the peacocks’ screeching. For Parminder Brar, the final straw came last year, when he says his father injured himself slipping on peacock excrement on Brar’s property. He formally issued a request to take down the tree where the peacocks had built a nest. The city turned him down. So, this week, Brar cut down the tree himself. The move has sparked a furore in Sullivan Heights, angering his neighbours and potentially earning Brar a fine of up to $10,000. “The majority of us love them. They add value to the neighbourhood,” says Katie Taylor, who has lived on the street for 12 years. Unlike their native counterpart, the Canada geese who periodically stop by and can be aggressive, the peacocks have proven to be peaceful neighbours. “We haven’t seen any aggression from the peacocks,” Taylor says. “You can feed them from your hands.” Many of the residents on the Sullivan Heights community Facebook page feel less warmly towards the birds. Complaints to the city authorities have been submitted since as far back as 2009, after a nearby farm where the peacocks used to feed closed down and the birds chose to relocate to Sullivan Heights. The city initially responded by sending animal control staff to round up the peacocks and release them elsewhere. But the birds kept returning. Ultimately, the issue was dropped because the community was split over whether to let the birds stay. “It’s a legal grey area,” says Jaspreet Rehal, the city’s public safety manager. “They don’t fall squarely into any animal control rules, regulations and bylaws.” Nevertheless, he says Brar’s decision to take the law into his own hands was wrong. “Cutting down the tree was not an option. It was a very healthy tree, it was important to the environment around it and we take tree removal very seriously.” The next step, Rehal says, is to convene a consultation with the community as a whole to decide what to do, with the likely result that the peacocks are relocated. For now, the birds have taken to perching on Brar’s roof.
0||ECB plans to allow Hundred teams to reserve local star playersEngland’s new 100-ball tournament could feature local marquee players to ensure the eight teams do not go without high-profile cricketers from their respective regions. The Hundred, which begins in 2020, will feature squads of 15 selected predominantly via a draft system, with budgets estimated to be in the region of the £900,000 salary cap in place for franchises in Australia’s Big Bash League. The thinking is to have up to four slots for overseas players – three in the playing XI – and the 15th squad member as a wildcard pick from the Twenty20 Blast that precedes it, allowing in-form but undrafted county players a late route in. Each team will have a designated general manager who will oversee their squad lists. Though the eight teams are expected to have names that do not reflect existing county or city identities, there is a growing belief among the boards that will run them, and those working on The Hundred’s regulations, that some local flavour is needed in the squads. To that end, plans are being considered that would allow teams to reserve one or possibly two local marquee players before the first round of the draft so that, say, the Edgbaston team could guarantee a Birmingham-born cricketer such as Chris Woakes or Moeen Ali in its ranks, or the Headingley side contains some Yorkshiremen. Teams who opted not to do this – the Cardiff side, for example, may not consider a Glamorgan player suitable for a top berth – would likely then get priority come the first round of the main draft, in which the general managers will take it in turns to select players using preset salary bands. With Test cricket set to be played at the same time, it remains to be seen whether England’s red-ball players are also allocated to their existing “home” teams or to another if their county’s is not one of the eight host grounds. Given their availability is expected to be greatly reduced, they may well sit outside the 15-man squads. As well as drawing on up to 96 of the 420 professional cricketers in the County Championship, depending on how many overseas players are drafted, The Hundred will also involve a number of county coaches and support staff seconded for the duration of the tournament even though their main employers will still be playing domestic cricket. International coaches who travel the global domestic Twenty20 circuit, such as Gary Kirsten or Tom Moody, will doubtless be sought out by some teams but the organisers hope the best of British talent gets a chance, too, by arranging their release. David Ripley of Northamptonshire, who has had success in Twenty20, is one example. Needless to say, while the competition does not start for another two years, the counties are keen to know as early as possible which players and support staff will be lost to it. They are pushing for an early draft, while the debate continues as to whether 50-over or championship cricket should be played during this time. The team behind The Hundred at the England and Wales Cricket Board, led by Sanjay Patel, will meet representatives of the Professional Cricketers’ Association at Edgbaston on Tuesday to explain the rationale behind the format. The latter will seek an explanation as to why this is occurring after the decision has been made. The PCA will have players from each of the 18 first-class counties, plus representatives of the England men’s and women’s teams, and intend to hold an in-house meeting in advance to ensure their primary concerns – such as the move away from T20 to a format that is not played at international level – are coordinated. The players’ union is under pressure from its members to provide strong leadership as the cricketing landscape shifts, not just in regards to The Hundred but during the continuing negotiations over the new county partnership that will kick in when the ECB’s £1.1bn five-year broadcast deal – which is worth more than double the one it replaces – begins in 2020. As with the Australian pay dispute last year, there will be strong emphasis on remunerating emerging players during talks over a new salary cap. During the week the PCA highlighted nine cricketers whose county terms have been under the national minimum wage in the past 12 months in what it called “widespread employment contract abuses”. English cricket has been advised to adopt a collective bargaining model by players’ union chief, Tony Irish. The executive chairman of the Federation of International Cricketers’ Association (FICA) is counselling a radical change in approach. “A number of countries have collective agreements between the board, the players’ association and the states or franchises operating in domestic cricket. These agreements regulate player contract issues such as player numbers, standard contracts, minimum and maximum contract amounts and so on. An agreement such as this involving the counties could be put in place.”
4||10 herbs you probably haven't heard of but should be growingIt is no secret that I think with my stomach. And as summer approaches, my thoughts turn greedily to herbs. But let’s be adventurous here: a single plant of something new can radically change your cooking, offering new pairings and flavours. So it’s time to think beyond parsley, basil and rosemary. I have another agenda for wanting more herbs in your life: I’ve become president of the Herb Society, founded by the magnificent Hilda Leyel in 1927, who believed passionately that herbs increased our health and wellbeing. If I wish anything for you this growing season it’s that you sow from seed, because the rarer stuff is often not available as plants at garden centres, where there’s limited space. Seeds take up no room and can be sent anywhere. Plus, there’s the satisfaction of seeing through the whole life cycle with nurture and love. Here are 10 herbs to expand your range: all, I promise, will bring joy to you, your garden and the bees. 1 Sweet bergamot, Monarda didyma Also known as bee balm or oswego tea, this is a North American prairie herb. It tastes of bergamot, with a hint of mint and thyme. If you like Earl Grey tea, you’d enjoy this as a great infusion and it’s a beautiful, bee-friendly addition to the garden. Buy from victoriananursery.co.uk or chilternseeds.co.uk. 2 Lettuce-leaved basil, Ocimum basilicum ‘Foglia di Lattuga’ I know, I know, basil doesn’t sound original, but this one is a monster. The leaves grow hand-sized, meaning a single leaf fits perfectly in a sandwich, with a flavour similar to sweet basil but slightly stronger. Grow in a pot, somewhere sheltered and warm; slugs love the large leaves when young, so mollycoddle it. I’d even consider growing inside on a windowsill until July. Buy from seedsofitaly.com. 3 Summer savory, Satureja hortensis If you use a lot of thyme in cooking, then you’ll love the tender tips of summer savory. This is the herb to pair with beans, with its sweet, spicy, peppery notes and pungent aroma. Or use under the skin of a roast chicken, in pork dishes and with cabbage. It is easy to dry for winter. It grows best in full sun, in free-draining soil, and is very happy in a pot. It is not frost hardy. Buy from sarahraven.com. 4 Mitsuba, Japanese wild parsley Somewhere between parsley and celery, and with a hint of sorrel and coriander, this is a subtle herb. Use the sprouts in salads and the leaves much like parsley. If your garden is shady, this is the one for you. Grow it in the sun and it will taste bitter. Buy from kingsseeds.com or chilternseeds.co.uk. 5 Tulsi, Ocimum tenuiflorum Holy basil makes for a wonderful tea and smells heavenly of peppermint, cloves, liquorice and lemons. It’s a tender, sun-loving plant and may need to be grown on a warm windowsill if you don’t have a sheltered garden. It’s a little tricky from seed: you need a heated propagator and good light. Buy young plants from victoriananursery.co.uk or pepperpotherbplants.co.uk, or seeds from jungleseeds.co.uk. 6 Korean mint, Agastache rugosa This is somewhere between mint and basil; the leaves smell distinctly minty, but there’s also an aniseed flavour present. It’s a very handsome plant, growing up to a metre and loved by bees. It can grow in sun or part shade, in humus-rich soil. Sow now on a sunny windowsill. It works well in spicy dishes and fish stews. Buy from realseeds.co.uk. 7 Houttuynia cordata If you have a pond, grow this strange and wonderful edible in its margins. There’s a variety called Chameleon, which is green, pink and white, or a more refined double white flowering form. I can best describe the taste as somewhere between fish sauce and something floral, and it smells of orange peel. You can eat it raw or use in a fish curry. Buy from mr-fothergills.co.uk or crocus.co.uk. 8 Par-cel, cutting celery If celery has alluded you as something impossible to grow well, try par-cel, a cross between parsley (easy to grow) and celery (not so easy). It’s grown for leaf production rather than stems, and is sweeter-tasting than celery leaves. Useful for stocks and soups, and healthy yet tasty so you can munch on it daily. Sow it now in sun or part shade. Buy from chilternseeds.co.uk. 9 Chop suey greens, Glebionis coronaria An edible chrysanthemum that is used as a leaf vegetable. Pick the leaves young and use immediately or they taste very bitter. Good with rice. Let a few grow tall for the lovely yellow flowers (also edible). Sow now, in full sun. Buy from kingsseeds.com. 10 Vietnamese coriander, Persicaria odorata A lemony, minty coriander that’s a doddle to grow in a pot, doesn’t mind if you forget to water it, and packs a punch in slaws, summer rolls, chicken and potato salads and in spicy soups. It’s not fully hardy, so will need protection and is best bought as a plant, as the seeds are not widely available. Buy from norfolkherbs.co.uk. • Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).
23||Alabama's lynch mob memorial: reporting on an American tabooBy any measure, Bryan Stevenson has achieved incredible things during his career as a civil rights lawyer in the deep south of America. He has spared more than 128 people from the death chamber; brought the plight of children sentenced to die in prison before the US supreme court, which ruled the practice unlawful; and has been one of the country’s leading critics of mass incarceration of African Americans. And now, his years of legal work and activism have led him to create a national memorial in Montgomery, Alabama. It is America’s only memorial dedicated to lynching victims. Over six acres, 800 rusted steel cylinders suspended in the air represent the more than 4,000 men and women lynched at the hands of white people in America between 1877 and 1950. Each slab carries the names of victims and the county where their lynchings took place, most of them in southern states: Georgia, Tennessee, Mississippi, Louisiana ... As our journalist Jamiles Lartey observed, to walk through the site is to symbolically watch a person being hanged by the mob. Inscriptions give the public the deplorable reasons why victims were killed: for “frightening” a white girl, for standing around in a white neighbourhood, for organising coal miners, for daring to ask a white woman for a glass of water. Our task as editors and reporters was how to do justice to this remarkable story. How would we be able to capture the essence of what remains a daring proposition in today’s America? Should we show readers the horror of lynchings by using graphic pictures (we decided the answer was yes). Should we be as bold as Stevenson and use words such as “sadism” in our headlines, knowing that some readers would find that hard to stomach? (Again, we decided yes). We also wanted to underline an essential feature of the memorial and its twin Legacy Museum: that they are not academic pieces rooted in the past, but explorations of modern America that draw a direct line from slavery to the present day. Just last month a young man called Diante Yarber was killed in a hail of bullets fired by a police officer; two black men were kicked out of a Starbucks for “trespassing” (they weren’t); and a woman named Chikesia Clemons was arrested and tackled to the floor by a policeman, her breasts exposed, after a disagreement with a store employee. The Guardian shares Stevenson’s commitment to confront the battles of today by airing and understanding the sins of the past, which is why we were determined to portray his creation as powerfully and meaningfully as possible. For us, journalistically, that meant relating some of the highly distressing stories of what happened in the lynching era, as well as exploring some of the contemporary manifestations of racial injustice in the US. This resulted in our series Pain and terror: America’s history of racism The Equal Justice Initiative, Stevenson’s civil rights organisation, gave us full access as their media partners at the two-day summit that they held to mark the opening of the memorial and museum. Our first challenge was to find a special way of portraying the memorial itself, deploying the Guardian’s full range of journalistic tools, including video, reportage and photography. We wanted to find a relative of someone who had been touched by lynching to walk through the memorial grounds with the Guardian team. We were grateful, with EJI’s help, to be able to tell the extraordinary story of Vanessa Croft, whose uncle Fred was forced to flee Alabama as a teenager, having narrowly escaped his own lynching. On the day of the shoot, a storm brewed in Alabama. The weather forecast was so bad that it looked as though Croft, who lives two hours from Montgomery, would be unable to reach us. To our huge relief, she decided to brave it and having negotiated torrential rain spent an hour with us walking through the memorial. It was a moving experience for us: not only did she share her family’s most traumatic event, she also gave us a glimpse of what it’s like to be a black woman living in the deep south in 2018: just a few weeks ago, after work, she was followed by a huge truck sporting two confederate flags all the way home. You can read more about Croft’s story, as well as the odious crimes committed in the lynching period, in our feature The Sadism Of White Men: Why America Must Atone for its Lynchings. All in all, the Guardian spent four days on the ground, reporting from the EJI summit. We listened to, and interviewed, many of the most prominent advocates for racial justice in America today, including the reverends Jesse Jackson and William Barber, the US hip hop band The Roots, the film maker Ava duVernay, the former vice president Al Gore and a senator, Cory Booker. It was striking that thousands of people, black and white, had travelled long distances – including across the country – to mark this event. There was a sense, which we tried to convey in our journalism, that a major taboo in American cultural life had finally been broken. By acknowledging the fiercely uncomfortable truth of what white supremacy had done to so many communities, over so many years, the beginning of a process of healing had begun. By the end of Friday we felt we had helped, in some small way, to tell the story of America’s truth and reconciliation. That sense of something new was felt powerfully when standing in a crowd of thousands of young Alabamans in Montgomery’s Riverfront park for EJI’s final event: a concert of top musicians who support the mission. The surprise guest was announced by Stevenson himself. As Stevie Wonder made his way to the middle of the stage, a devotional silence fell in the crowd. With a hint of melancholy in his voice, the singer made an impassioned speech about the lynching victims, saying he shared their pain. He then performed an unscheduled, spine-tingling rendition of the Negro spiritual Swing Low, Swing Chariot. “Well now if you get there before I do, comin’ for to carry me home”, sang Wonder, whose mother was from Alabama, “Tell all my friends that I’m a comin’ too, comin’ for to carry me home.”
3||Identity politics has veered away from its roots. It's time to bring it backIdentity politics have become a convenient scapegoat for the deepening political divisions in the United States. Though evidence for the claim is thin, detractors blame Hillary Clinton’s presidential loss on her choice to provide a platform for discussions of identity and inequality during her campaign. In the months leading up to 8 November 2016, Clinton differentiated herself from her opponent by becoming the candidate who cared about America’s underserved groups: women, immigrants, the LGBTQ community, black and Latino voters, and the many people whose identities span multiple categories. Her supporters rallied behind the Big Tent slogan: “Love Trumps Hate.” But on election day, it did not. In an interview with 60 Minutes last fall, Steve Bannon, the former chief strategist for the White House and chairman of Donald Trump’s 2016 campaign, warned, “The longer they talk about identity politics, I got ’em.” A skittish left might view Bannon’s words as an imminent threat. But identity politics are not to be feared. Their effectiveness as a progressive political strategy, however, is undermined by their misuse. When a group of black feminists called the Combahee River Collective coined the phrase “identity politics” in 1977, they imagined that the “seemingly personal experiences of individual Black women’s lives” would provide the foundation for a politics that is “actively committed to struggling against racial, sexual, heterosexual, and class oppression”. Their ideology began with self, but it was not self-obsessed. Ultimately, they knew their work would benefit everyone. Since then, identity politics have veered away from Combahee’s foundational ideals. We should return to them, not to appease the right wing but to reaffirm the importance of a progressivism that touts liberty and justice for all. Identity politics become flimsy when they devolve into shallow back-and-forths that conflate lived experience with sound political analysis. A worldview that moves us closer to equality doesn’t stem from living in a certain kind of body. It emerges from pursuing a certain kind of politics. When identities can be invoked to assert an unquestionable authority, marginalized people can get by making dubious or completely false claims because of their “lived experience”. As secretary of housing and urban development, Ben Carson, has endorsed delays of anti-discrimination regulation in housing and called poverty “a state of mind”. Carson, himself, grew up impoverished in Detroit. He documented his journey to becoming a renowned neurosurgeon in a widely read autobiography, Gifted Hands. Because of his personal story, Carson is held up, by himself and his supporters, as a testament to the supreme importance of hard work. But the belief that grit is the key to escaping poverty is contradicted by decades of social science research. Poverty persists because of a crumbling social safety net not a culture of dependency. Carson’s anecdotes are compelling, in part, because our lives do matter. Marginalized people gain a unique insight into systemic inequality because we face it every day. For too long those stories have been doubted or dismissed by claims that only an “objective” or “dispassionate” viewpoint can be trusted. But lived experience is one form of knowledge that should be considered alongside others, and stories are most useful when assessed within a broader context of structural inequity. The Combahee River Collective argued that one’s political consciousness colors how one will interpret life events; thus, similar experiences can lead similarly situated people to draw divergent conclusions. For example, every black American who grew up like Carson and went on to be successful will not share his views. In fact, based on the racial makeup of the Republican party, most do not. So sweeping generalizations about the lives of oppressed people that are backed up only by stories of individuals should always be interrogated because so many of those conclusions collapse when examined more closely. A misuse of identity is not just a conservative problem. In the #MeToo era, women are empowered to call on their experiences with bias and sexual assault and create change within industries that facilitate abuse. But those traumas are not a pass for women to avoid difficult questions about the substance of their activism. Actor Rose McGowan emerged as a sexual assault activist in the wake of the Harvey Weinstein scandal that upended Hollywood’s silence on the mistreatment of actresses. When a trans woman confronted McGowan about her past transphobic comments at a book event, she responded angrily. On Twitter she charged that the audience and her staff failed to protect her during the exchange, and she refused to apologize for the statements. Instead, the actor-turned-author cancelled the rest of the book tour. Though McGowan’s identities as a woman and a victim of sexual assault are central to her activism, using them to shut down criticism is unproductive for the movement she advocates. Trans women are also victims of discrimination in employment, housing and healthcare, and an inclusive feminism must invest itself in recognizing all who are vulnerable. These sorts of oversights are easily correctable if acknowledged, but treating identities as credentials discourages critical self-reflection. Thoughtful conversations and meaningful activism require a measure of openness that the current paradigms for identity politics don’t always allow. We have to make sure that our exchanges do not reproduce oppressive power dynamics, but every challenge is not oppressive. An identity politics that is not principally concerned with dismantling all forms of inequality quickly devolves into a never-ending game of oneupmanship where self-satisfaction is all that’s won. For marginalized people, our power comes from seeing identity as a starting point, not the end. Kimberly Foster is a cultural critic and editor-in-chief of For Harriet, a digital community for black women
4||How to fix shady gardens, create shelter or hide the bins: tips from Chelsea starsThe challenge: a windy spot Juliet Sargeant A lovely view can come with a downside: exposure and wind. Wind is your garden’s enemy – it evaporates moisture from leaves, batters branches, and can uproot plants. And it makes sitting out deeply unenjoyable. If your plot is wide open on all sides, first decide which view you want to focus on and where the prevailing wind is coming from. Then work on framing that view and blocking the wind. In the case of one client, we built a wall to run the length of one side: don’t build a solid wall surrounding a garden, it may cause strong eddies in certain spots. It’s better to construct a partial wall with gaps, or use slatted fencing. If you can’t build a barrier, it’s surprising how much more sheltered your garden will be by just digging down a foot (try sitting on the ground to see for yourself). Trees can also provide a natural barrier; try Tilia cordata, Crataegus monogyna, Alnus cordata, or Sorbus aria. When planting on a windy site, think of your plants as providing different lines of defence. The first, most exposed ones need to take anything the elements can throw at them: try Griselinia littoralis, Elaeagnus x ebbingei, Tamarix tetrandra, Euonymus japonicus, Olearia macrodonta or Hippophae rhamnoides. Plants farther in don’t need to be quite as resilient: consider Pittosporum tenuifolium, Laurus nobilis ‘Angustifolia’, Nassella tenuissima, miscanthus grasses, mophead hydrangeas, larger, fleshy-leaved hebes, Rosa rugosa and figs. In the more sheltered heart of the garden, you could plant canna lilies, oleanders, Solanum crispum, scented pelargoniums, ornamental bananas, crinums, Agapanthus africanus, Trachelospermum jasminoides, giant echiums and Campsis x tagliabuana. Plants suited to coastal, Mediterranean, drought-resistant climates work well in exposed sites: for example, senecio, santolina, rosemary, lavenders, olives, phlomis, helianthemum, Trachycarpus fortunei and Euphorbia wulfenii. In any exposed site, make your plants as resilient as possible: stake them for up to four years, encourage them to be as healthy as possible by cutting back in autumn, and feed and water to build up their strength. Put down lots of manure, mulch with shingle to lock in moisture, and plant densely. Juliet Sargeant won gold and people’s choice at Chelsea in 2016 for the Modern Slavery garden; julietsargeant.com. The challenge: an awkward shape Nic Howard I love challenging plots. In fact, an awkward-shaped garden is often easier than a rectangle – with the latter you usually end up dividing up the space and putting in angles to make it more interesting. I recently designed a small triangle-shaped courtyard garden (pictured above) which was previously a gloomy, shady plot with overhanging ivy. I created several triangle-shaped beds, all abutting a paved floor and following the same line. It’s useful to think of a small space as a room: by doing this, I divided the garden into three zones – for dining, seating, and for plants. A right-angled fitted wooden bench forms an enclosed seating area, positioned at the same angle as the triangular beds. For small spaces, I usually opt for a paved surface over a lawn. A lawn is like a barrier, similar to a rug in a living room: people tend to edge round it rather than walk on it. I mentally divided the garden in two to lend it structure, and planted roughly half the site with green plants and shrubs, and the opposite side with colourful flowers. At the centre of this invisible divide is a large wall-mounted mirror that provides a focal point and reflects a different part of the garden when you look at it. It is mounted on an ugly wall that was built in the 1980s. Any messy wall or fence will look better painted black, and provides a stunning backdrop to white flowers. If you’re lucky enough to have a gorgeous old wall, make a feature of it. With a small plot, you have to embrace what space you have and plant accordingly. Keep your palette limited. I had only six or seven different plants on each side of the garden. Similarly, don’t introduce too much colour with garden furniture and accessories: choose an accent colour and use sparingly. Nic Howard designed sculptor David Harber’s garden at Chelsea in 2017, which won five stars as well as the RHS director general’s tradestand award; we-love-plants.co.uk. The challenge: a roof garden Manoj Malde Done well, a roof garden can be a wonderful extension of indoor space. Before you start, make sure the roof is structurally sound. It must be able to hold several people, furniture and soil-filled planters – remember, the latter are heavier when wet (to keep the weight down, fill the bottom of pots with broken polystyrene pieces). If you’re not sure whether your roof is load-bearing, do this simple test: does it have sides or balustrades and a door leading to it (as opposed to a window)? If so, the architects probably designed it for human use. If not, track down the architect’s drawings to see how it was constructed (an estate agent should be able to help) or get a structural engineer or surveyor to advise if extra support is needed. A roof garden also needs a slight slope so water can run off – it’s rare for a flat roof to have no gradient (they are usually imperceptible) and drainpipe; if yours doesn’t, a landscape contractor can compensate this in the build of the flooring or decking. Alternatively incorporate self-watering tanks into the containers – the plants use the water as and when they need it. Once you’re ready to start designing, work out which direction the prevailing wind is blowing; roof gardens can be exposed, and even if they’re surrounded by buildings, the wind will hurtle through gaps. Try to block these with larger planters or fencing. For one of my clients, there was no barrier around the edge of the garden, so I used the planters to form a “wall”. However small your roof garden, try to zone it: a sheltered area for relaxing, a space for cooking, a spot with a table. Aim for plants that thrive in exposed conditions – anything with small, waxy or hairy leaves, or silvery/grey stems help prevent evaporation. Go for olive trees and large cushions of Pittosporum tobira ‘Nanum’ for structure, lavender and rosemary for robust scent, Perovskia for scent and silvery stems, Panicum and Pennisetum grasses for lightness and movement, Verbena bonariensis for height (they also have strong stems). Finally, consider the logistics of getting large plants and trees on to your roof: think about door openings and ceiling heights. Manoj Malde won a silver gilt at Chelsea in 2017 for his garden, Beneath A Mexican Sky; manojmaldegardendesign.co.uk. The challenge: deep shade Tom Stuart-Smith When it comes to gardens in deep shade, the trick is to embrace it, rather than fight it. In the summer of 2013, I won a competition to design a tiny garden in a dark and dingy courtyard at the Royal Academy in London. Most of it gets no direct sunlight and is surrounded by tall sooted brick walls. Our solution was to embrace its drawbacks, and introduce a simple palette of plants to give it a really strong character. We used more dark brick to make the space even darker, and filled it with tree ferns. They are extraordinary, almost primeval. Ferns don’t need much light or soil, so we planted them through the paving. They irradiate even the darkest corners with an almost fluorescent light, so make a dark space feel brighter. We chose the tall tree fern Dicksonia antarctica, from south-east Australia. The first challenge with tree ferns is believing that the log you are delivered will actually grow; the next is getting it to stand up. We resorted to shoving a 12-inch steel pin up the trunk. As well as the ferns, the garden has the shade-tolerant evergreen Pittosporum tobira ‘Nanum’, the lush Hakonechloa macra grass, and Virginia creepers growing up the walls. Sedges and grasses add a soothing feel. Bamboo is another good plant for deep shade, particularly if you’re looking to divide up the space by creating “screens”. Similarly, spotted laurels and fatsias can survive with little natural light, but take up a lot of room. Tom Stuart-Smith has won eight gold medals and three best in show awards at Chelsea; tomstuartsmith.co.uk. The challenge: hiding bins and bikes Gavin McWilliam My design partner Andrew Wilson and I are getting more and more requests to design bin storage into our gardens. If storage has to be on display, then try to make sure it’s a good-quality finish. If you can hide it, then do – either by placing it behind a hedge, or planting in front of it. Any storage is better than having ugly plastic bins on show – just remember to leave enough room for access. We often design bespoke bin storage for clients, as part of a bigger garden design, but more affordable off-the-peg options are really good now – try wayfair.co.uk or, more top end, gardentrellis.co.uk. With wooden slatted bin storage, which is the most common, look for more open slats so they don’t smell too much. Look for top, lift-up lids, which are easier to access. If the finish is a little rough, stain it black. It’s a misconception that garden furniture and storage has to be green or brown – these colours actually stand out. Black recedes, and highlights anything planted in front of it. For one client, we designed a log screen – a steel frame that is filled with chopped logs, used for the fire. It’s used to hide all the gardening paraphernalia, from bins to tools. For another client’s Georgian terrace front garden, pictured above, we designed both bin and bike storage. The bins are stored in a simple bespoke western red cedar slatted store, designed to match the fence behind it. The bike storage is on the lower-ground level, accessed via a set of steps. We wanted to make a feature of it at ground-floor level, so built a bespoke planter above from Cor-ten, a steel that, over time, gains a lovely weathered, rust-coloured patina. We filled it with soil and planted it with Crataegus prunifolia ‘Broad-Leaved Cockspur Thorn’ tree, underplanted with Molinia caerulea subsp. caerulea ‘Heidebraut’ and Aquilegia vulgaris var. stellata ‘Black Barlow’. Gardening paraphernalia (hoses, tools, electrics) can be ugly. For the same client, we designed a wall-to-wall screen in black charred larch, that sits half a metre back from the rear wall of the garden. Behind it are pipes, drains, an irrigation system, hoses and gardening tools. The pleached trees provide privacy from neighbouring houses. Gavin McWilliam and Andrew Wilson won gold at Chelsea in 2017 for the Breaking Ground garden; mcwilliamstudio.com. The challenge: a small urban plot Kate Gould For city dwellers, a garden is often an extension of their home, and people want to use it all year round. One client, who had a garden about the size of a living room – 11m x 5m – accessible only through the house, wanted me to design an attractive space, as she and her partner entertain a lot. She wanted their young sons to enjoy it, too. It also had to incorporate some clever bin storage. We couldn’t lay a real lawn, as it’s concrete underneath with no drainage, so we went for artificial grass – a realistic, thatchy soft grass (easigrass.com) with a rubberised bottom, so the boys wouldn’t hurt themselves when they fell over. Alternatively, you could paint a concrete floor and put down outdoor rugs (Ikea has cheerful, affordable options). To provide an element of privacy from neighbouring houses, we kept wooden trellising, which surrounds the garden at shoulder height but doesn’t take away too much light. In a small plot, it’s better to have a few well-filled larger pots rather than a lot of smaller ones – it’s more dramatic and welcoming, and less bitty. So we positioned large steel planters around the perimeter, along with a bespoke steel and wood barbecue unit, and then rolled out the grass. We filled the planters with white hydrangeas, ferns, hellebores, and tiarella. We planted a green wall at the rear of the plot, with more ferns and herbs, incorporating an irrigation system. We trained a scented Chinese jasmine, Trachelospermum, up the walls and trellis: it flowers only sporadically in shaded spots but likes the warmth of an urban garden. At the house end, where there is more light, are foxgloves and penstemons. A wooden bench seat with cushions (from zarahome.com) doubles as recycling storage. Alongside it is a vertical wooden planter filled with herbs – perfect for when space is tight. We painted a black downpipe white, to blend with the walls. Good lighting prolongs use into the evenings. So we filled the garden with festoon lights strung on hooks, up-lights and fairy lights on a bay tree. Kate Gould won gold and best in category at Chelsea in 2017 for her City Living garden; kategouldgardens.com. • Interviews by Hannah Booth. This article was amended on 11 and 17 May to correctly accredit the work of Andrew Wilson and Gavin McWilliam. Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).
5||Genderquake: Channel 4’s non-binary answer to Big Brother“To those people who say we don’t exist, I’m right fucking here,” says Saffron, a non-binary 22-year-old and force of nature whose defiance masks a world of pain. In Genderquake (Monday, 9pm), Channel 4’s non-binary answer to Big Brother, 11 people of assorted sexuality and gender identity are parachuted into the Sussex countryside to live together for a week. In between barbecues, hot tub sessions and alarmed encounters with cows, life stories are swapped, differences thrashed out and tears – theirs and ours – shed. What looks on paper to be an exercise in the worst form of televised manipulation turns out to be a candid, eye-opening and frequently joyful study of lives across the gender spectrum. Among the housemates is Brooke, 24, who has Klinefelter syndrome, which means she has an extra X chromosome. Despite having been born a boy, she began growing breasts and developing female characteristics when she was 13, which went down like a cup of cold sick at her boys’ school. There is Cambell, a 22-year-old trans woman who has undergone hormone treatment since she was 16 and has recently completed gender reassignment surgery. There’s also Marcus, a gay man in Cruella de Vil makeup; Phoenix, a “freaky alien child” who identifies as 70% female; and 21-year-old Tom, a straight man from Barnsley who declares: “You’ve got a penis, or you’ve got a vagina. There’s no in-between, is there?” Reality TV convention dictates that, when strangers are thrust together, there should be a villain in their midst. At first, that role seems to be fulfilled by Tom who, despite having never encountered transgenderism, has clear views on the subject. In the event – spoiler alert – it takes less than a day for him to have his mind blown, to renounce his penis-or-vagina stance and assume the role of house agony uncle. “I’ve learned more in the last six or seven hours than I’ve learned in my whole life. It’s fucking crazy,” he sniffs. Less so the pale, stale males and overnight gender experts in the local pub whose eyebrows shoot into orbit as the visitors troop in for a pint. “It’s all become quite fashionable, it’s nothing more than that,” says one man to Saffron, who has just patiently explained her experience of gender dysphoria. There are those who will argue there are more serious ways to investigate transgenderism in the 21st century, possibly involving academics, medical experts and social commentators. But there can be no better way to get to grips with the trans and non-binary experience than meeting those living it. Here, there are open-hearted discussions about hormone treatments, surgery, sex, beauty regimes and what makes a woman. Bullying, bigotry and the fear of ending up alone are also recurring themes. In its ruminations on identity and selfhood, Genderquake is honest and open, and lays waste to notions of transgenderism as an extreme form of attention-seeking. “It’s never been more confusing to be young, free and single,” says the opening voiceover. But these fearless young people know exactly what and who they are. The confusion lies with the rest of us.
10||America's teachers on strike: 'We are done being the frog that is being boiled'America’s education system has reached a breaking point. After years of cuts to teachers’ wages and education budgets, teachers across the US have taken action – walking out on the job in states including West Virginia, Oklahoma and Arizona. More strikes are planned and the teachers have become empowered by material gains in wages and funding as legislators scramble to get them back to work. But the crisis remains. Public school teachers’ weekly wages were 17% lower than those of comparable workers in 2015 – a gap that has risen from just 1.8% lower in 1994, according to the Economics Policy Institute. Women, who make up 76% of the teaching profession, have been particularly hard hit. In 1960 female teachers earned 14.7% more than comparably educated women; by 2000 they were earning 13.2% less, according to a study by Sylvia Allegretto, chair of the Center on Wage and Employment Dynamics at the University of California, Berkeley. The strides women have made in the private sector have left female teachers far behind. Here are some of the women who took to the streets of Arizona this week demanding action. Their strike has now ended with a promise of a 20% pay rise and extra funding for schools. But another day of protest is planned for 16 May. Amy Vizino Amy Vizino is a 42-year-old special education paraprofessional living in Tucson, Arizona who makes $11 an hour. Her job is tough and often involves physical assaults on her by students with emotional disorders. “There is a lot of violence. I’ve been spit on, had stuff thrown at you, horrible words, bites, kicked. The teacher we work for has had a concussion twice,” said Vizino. “I probably have to restrain a kid twice a week – it’s horrible. “It’s a lot of work and a lot of stress that I take home because I love them. I care about them and I feel like I come home to my kids and I’m all sapped because, you know, I work my butt off,” she said. As a single mother with three kids and making only $11 an hour, Vizino is forced to live with her mother in order to make ends meet. She says that despite the pay she still enjoys the work. “I love kids and I’m really good at it so I feel passionate, but if nothing changes I am going to have to find something else,” said Vizino. Vizino said she went out on strike to fight for higher funding for paraprofessionals like herself, who make poverty wages. “I am willing to hold out and not go back in until something gets done.” Kristin Beller Kristin Beller is a kindergarten teacher in Wake County, North Carolina. She is helping to organize a massive effort to encourage teachers to use a personal day to take off work on 16 May. Instead of showing up for work, Beller is part of an effort backed by the North Carolina Association of Educators to use that day of missed work to hold a massive rally on the first day of the state general assembly. Beller said that in the past the union had done lobby days, but never went so far as to encourage members to take off personal days en masse. She said she was inspired to push for more militant action after watching the successful teachers’ strike in West Virginia. “We saw Kentucky, Oklahoma and Arizona of course, and that momentum that has been building in these ‘right-to-work states’ is inspiring,” said Beller. Teachers in North Carolina, who were legally barred from collective bargaining, have had trouble attracting members, who don’t see the union as providing much support. “For years, people would say you don’t have a real union in North Carolina, but what we have been saying for so long is that a union is a group of people that come together with similar struggles and decide together to choose something better for themselves” said Beller. Now, though, they are attracting new members because the union is taking more direct action. “If we want to be a union, we must act like a union,” said Beller. “We may not have collective bargaining rights, but we can act like a union. What we have seen in other states is just because something isn’t legal doesn’t mean we can’t do it.” “We are done being the frog that is being boiled,” said Beller. “We are ready to show up on 16 May and make a show of power and strength.” Melissa Espindola Melissa Espindola is a 24-year-old chemistry teacher at Pueblo high school, a low-income school in Tucson in her second year of teaching. Espindola said that she was inspired to walk out over the difficulties that she has in getting resources for her classroom. She says that seeing teachers in West Virginia successfully strike persuaded her that teachers in Arizona could also successfully strike. “I think it gave us power and it gave us hope that if they can do it, we can do it,” said Espindola. Last Thursday, Espindola took part in a 50,000 person rally which stormed the Arizona state capitol, a rally that was nearly 10 times as big as the first rallies held during the West Virginia teachers’ strike. “It was so powerful and I am so happy to be part of history in making,” said Espindola. Like many young teachers, the difficulties of teaching in under-resourced schools has led her to think about quitting, but she says being involved in the movement to improve education has made her more upbeat about wanting to stay in the teaching profession over the long haul. “This movement makes me more excited to be doing this for the rest of my life,” said Espindola. “It just feels like we have so much support now. I am so glad that all the teachers got together and decided to start this movement and finally make a change in education.”
19||Lorrie Moore on political correctness, writing and why she's not worried by TrumpLorrie Moore enters a restaurant on a hot day in New York, glamorous in shades and limping slightly after twisting her ankle. It seems absurd that the short story writer and novelist is 61; there is a perennial springiness about Moore that in person, as on the page, comes across as youthful energy. She is in Manhattan for a few months while researching a novel, after which she will divide the rest of the year between an academic post in Nashville, Tennessee, and her home in Madison, Wisconsin. “I sometimes look out and just don’t know what city I’m in,” she says, her voice tremulous with her signature style, a sort of suppressed and sardonic amusement. See What Can Be Done is a collection of articles, essays and cultural commentary written over three decades by Moore. The pieces range from critical assessments of writers such as Margaret Atwood, to more memoirish pieces, to the closest Moore comes to a hatchet job, on a “dizzyingly unnecessary” book about the murder of six-year-old beauty queen JonBenét Ramsey. She is very funny on politics. (“Bill Clinton was the etchings man,” she writes during the 1992 presidential election campaign, “the guy with the soulful but collegiate gaze, the curly mouth, such heat in the face and itchy restlessness in a suit it seemed his clothes would fly off him.”) And while long disquisitions on TV shows such as The Wire and True Detective can have the air of an intellectual making heavy weather of popular culture, Moore is thrilling when defending real junk. Here is the opening paragraph to her essay from 2000 on the James Cameron film Titanic: I sometimes think of female adolescence as the most powerful life force human nature has to offer, and male adolescence as its most powerful death force, albeit a romantic one. For those of you who thought rationality and women’s studies courses had gotten rid of such broad and narratively grotesque ways of thinking, welcome. Coffee is available at the back of the room. Unusually for this sort of long-ranging collection, some of Moore’s observations seem if anything more trenchant now than they might have been then. In a 1993 essay on Atwood’s novel The Robber Bride, Moore writes of its author: “As with so many practitioners of identity politics, literary or otherwise, while one side of her banner defiantly exclaims ‘We Are!’ the other side, equally defiant, admonishes ‘Don’t Lump Us’.” “That was around, certainly in academe,” she says of the debate about identity politics. “Maybe not on the internet. But as an idea it was around.” So too were send ups of undergraduate sensitivities and Moore, in an essay on Philip Roth’s novel The Human Stain, calls him out for characterising campus liberalism as shrieking hysteria. “I think he had a very controversial take on things,” she says. “He’s very defensive about that novel apparently because he doesn’t want people to think it’s about [the writer] Anatole Broyard, even though the story of the character overlaps with Broyard’s story. It’s easy to paint it with a broad brush. But what’s going on on campuses is mostly good.” For 30 years Moore taught at the University of Wisconsin and her home is still in Madison. (Her son, who is in his early 20s, continues to live there, too.) Perhaps from the outside, she says, student politics look different these days, but that is not how things look from within. “We used to say that if we talked about political correctness, that another way of looking at it was that it was just plain courtesy. And I think that student sensitivity is good.” She pauses. “On the other hand, it’s important to be able to go on despite an imperfect world. Things can’t be absolutely adjusted.” Going on despite an imperfect world is very much how Moore’s characters move through her fiction. In her three novels – Anagrams (1986), Who Will Run the Frog Hospital? (1994) and A Gate at the Stairs (2009) – and in her more famous short stories, people go about constantly disappointing themselves and each other, often while being bitterly hilarious. Moore’s most celebrated story collection, Birds of America, was a bestseller when it came out in 1998 and established her as a writer at her best when picking apart the complex and very particular dynamics of American failure. For many years after Moore’s divorce, she fitted her work in around her son’s school and sports commitments and I wonder if, in the years since he’d grown up and left home, she had seen her productivity spike. She smiles. “A child reaches the age of 18 and you’re free, but it doesn’t really work that way. Well, for Alice Munro I think it does. There’s always someone to shame you.” She laughs. “But there’s always a lot of personal stuff and family stuff – it’s not just about the child; there are other things. And also you might slow down a bit. I always think that writers have until they’re 80.” This, at least, is something to be thankful for. “If you were a physicist, it would all be over. They’re done by 30. I mean they can still work, but if you’re going to get a new, brilliant idea, it has to happen by the time they’re 30.” Writers, of course, are different – “there are really no literary prodigies”, says Moore. “And again I’m using Munro as an example. I don’t think we’re going to hear from Alice Munro much any more, but she did a lot of work up until she was 80. So I’ve …” – she laughs at the absurdity of it – “got 19 more years.” In one of the essays in the new collection, Moore admits (although that is not perhaps the word she would use) to having voted more than once for the Green party candidate Ralph Nader and on that basis, I wondered if in the 2016 election she had gone for Jill Stein, another Green candidate, who was deplored by liberals for siphoning off votes from Hillary Clinton. No, she says. “I really had one issue, and it was guns. And Clinton was the one who was really good on that. Stein had the environment; I wish Clinton had gone after her votes. She didn’t go after Stein’s votes; if she’d spoken about the environment more, more green voters would’ve voted for her I’m sure. Instead – it’s the classic Democratic party mistake – they go to the middle. And they’ve already got the middle!” The gun issue was, she says, “the one thing Bernie Sanders wasn’t very good on”, and Moore doesn’t buy the line that it’s because the Vermont senator represents rural communities where hunting is popular. “Well, he used that as an excuse, but he voted five times against the Brady bill [the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act, mandating background checks on buyers of firearms in the US], which is just hand guns, it’s not hunting. They’re all vulnerable to the NRA and he wanted to maintain some kind of rating with the NRA, I guess. I don’t know.” Moore grew up in Glen Falls, a town in upstate New York, and her upbringing was fairly conservative. She refers in one of the essays to the fact that her parents made her and her siblings listen to passages from the Bible every night at the dinner table. “It does sound very strange,” she says. “I used to not tell people that because it sounded so weird, and now I’m sort of proud of it; yeah, we came from this very 19th-century-style family!” Which of her parents was the instigator? “They both just started to do it. I mean, neither of them right now are terribly religious. My mother doesn’t go to church at all. My father hadn’t been brought up in a church. I think they wanted us to get a sense of the Bible as literature. But it didn’t work, because we all sat there [she makes the face of a bored kid] kicking each other under the table. But it went on for years.” Between the main course and dessert, her father would read a passage from the New Testament on week nights and Saturday, and the Old Testament on Sundays. “We’d gotten a Bible that had all the different translations of the New Testament, so there was the revised standard, the King James, and additional translations, all side by side, and he loved that; I think really it appealed to his sense of literary scholarship.” A few years ago, Moore talked to her students about a Bible quote featured in, she thinks, an Alice Munro story. “And I found myself getting very excited about the different translations, and I could feel my father’s blood in me, running through! And my students were just staring at me, like: ‘What is she talking about?’ ” Her parents are both still alive and in their 90s, and when her father goes to church, she says, “sometimes he says to the minister: ‘I don’t believe a single word that you said today,’ and the minister’s always like: ‘That’s all right! We’ll take anybody here.’” It seems very Moore-like, this story, both in terms of her father’s orneriness and her enjoyment at telling it. There is a generosity in her fiction that is rooted in a love of exactly these kinds of absurdities and the difficult people who bring them about. Looking back, I wonder if there are any conclusions in her essays she would change, were she making them today? Oh, she says lightly, “I don’t know if I even have conclusions. Most of them are just circling sort of interrogations. I got a lot of mail about the OJ Simpson [essay] as if I were saying that OJ Simpson was innocent.” She wasn’t. “I was trying to say that in opera the tragic hero is always more interesting, and that’s why I wasn’t going to talk about the victims.” In any case, she hasn’t changed her mind “that the jury was right to find him not guilty. You can’t plant evidence and then expect the trial to go a certain way”. Does Moore think one gets softer as a critic as one ages? “I don’t know. Mary McCarthy didn’t. I think she was just very confident and she didn’t care. There is something about the crabby old person who no longer cares. Saul Bellow didn’t get softer. It just depends. I think you see things from a historical vantage point a little more easily than you do when you’re young. Like, I’m not as panicked about this Trump administration as some people are because people have already forgotten all these other things that happened to this country; it’s the 50th anniversary of Martin Luther King’s assassination; Robert Kennedy’s assassination; those eight years of George W Bush – oh my God they were a nightmare! Are people forgetting? So you see people rise up and get agitated, and you step back and say: ‘Oh well, we’ve been through this before.’ ” It is, of course, what the novelist is there for. “That doesn’t feel like softening, that feels like perspective” • See What Can be Done is published by Faber. To order a copy for £17 (RRP £20) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99.
4||Life gets better after 50: why age tends to work in favour of happinessWhen Jonathan Rauch fell into the doldrums in his 40s, he had no idea why. Life was good: he had a successful career, a solid relationship, good health and sound finances. Then he learnt about the happiness curve and it all became clear. Academics have found increasing evidence that happiness through adulthood is U-shaped – life satisfaction falls in our 20s and 30s, then hits a trough in our late 40s before increasing until our 80s. Forget the saying that life begins at 40 – it’s 50 we should be looking toward. Rauch, a senior fellow at the US thinktank the Brookings Institution, was so relieved to have found an explanation for the gloom that hit him and, he believed, many others in middle age that he became evangelical about spreading the word. He has written a book, The Happiness Curve: Why Life Gets Better After 50 (out in the US 1 May and UK 14 June), which includes personal stories, the latest data and illuminating interviews with economists, psychologists and neuroscientists. “The most surprising thing is that age tends to work in favour of happiness, other things being equal,” he tells the Guardian. “The most strange thing is that midlife slump is often about nothing.” Hold off on splashing out on that flashy sports car or embarking on an affair though. It is not the same as a midlife crisis, which according to the stereotype demands an urgent, rash response. The slump isn’t caused by anything, according to Rauch. It is a natural transition, simply due to the passing of time. “It’s a self-eating spiral of discontent,” he says. “It’s not because there’s something wrong with your life, or your marriage, or your mind, or your mental health.” Not everyone will experience a sunnier outlook in their 50s and beyond, Rauch acknowledges, because factors such as divorce, unemployment or illness can counter this. But, other things being equal, the U-curve holds. Rauch, an author and journalist, adds: “Those most likely to notice the arrow of time are the people without a lot of other change or difficulty in their life. Things seem to be going well for them, they’re achieving their goals, and nothing much has changed. They think, ‘Why do I feel less satisfied than I expected to? Why is this going on year after year? Why does it seem to be getting worse and not better? There must be something wrong with my life.’ “Well, there’s nothing wrong with your life, you’re just feeling the effects of time which others who may have more turbulent lives may not notice as much.” Rauch details a raft of research in his book to back up his claims. A 2008 study by economists David Blanchflower and Andrew Oswald found the U-curve – with the nadir, on average, at age 46 – in 55 of 80 countries, and they cited more than 20 other papers finding the U. It tends to show up in wealthier countries where people live longer, healthier lives. Life satisfaction statistics for the UK in 2014-15 show happiness declining from youth through middle age, hitting a low at 50 and rising to a peak at 70. Not all economists and psychologists agree. Economists Paul Frijters and Tony Beatton factored in the possibility that those who become happier in the studies are the same people who are more content when they start out. This can help them achieve greater career or relationship success, which leads to more happiness. Correcting for this effect, the U-shape disappears. Rauch, however, believes he is a textbook example of the U-curve. His mother suffered from depression and his parents broke up when he was 12, leaving his father to bring up three children on his own. Two years later, his father, a stressed and overworked lawyer in his mid-40s, lost his biggest client. Rauch remembers himself at 20, keen to accomplish something worthwhile by middle age and believing that when he did, he’d appreciate it. By his 40s, he had surpassed his dreams. He had published books; he was winning journalism prizes; he was in a relationship with Michael, the man he would later marry; he lived in an area of north Virginia with a strong sense of community. Yet he was preoccupied with what he had not achieved. He explains: “I was someone who was fortunate. I had good health and after my 20s, which were difficult because I came out as gay, I met one goal after another with more success than I’d ever expected. “Yet around the time I turned 40 I noticed this strange feeling of restlessness and discontent. This continued to grow as I got into my 40s to the point where I was 45 and I won the most prestigious award in magazine journalism [a National Magazine award] and that gave me a great feeling of satisfaction with my life for approximately 10 days. “All these feelings of discontent and restlessness – and even sometimes worthlessness and this feeling I’d almost wasted my life – kept coming back. “None of this made any rational sense. I began to think there must be something wrong with me. I began to think my personality had begun to turn dark in some way and that of course compounded the problem.” Around 50, the fog began to lift, despite the death of both his parents, the loss of his magazine job and the failure of a startup venture. Rauch, 58, says: “In my 50s, first the volume of the demons’ voices went down, and now I rarely hear their voices at all.” While researching his book, Rauch spoke to many people who’d experienced similar feelings. Karla, 54, is on the upswing of the curve. She says she is savouring her friendships more, feeling more organised and efficient, and doing more volunteering work. “Now I feel grateful for the now,” she tells Rauch. “On a day-to-day basis I probably do the same things, but I feel different.” Rauch tells the Guardian: “That’s a very profound insight because what we’re talking about here is not that the conditions of your life change in some huge way, but how you feel about your life changes.” Rauch puts forward various explanations for why we feel happier in our 50s and beyond. Research shows that older people feel less stress and regret, dwell less on negative information and are better able to regulate their emotions. Nor is status competition as important. Rauch says: “We seem to be wired to seek maximum status when we are young – the ambition to be on top of the world, to have the big job, to have the extraordinary marriage to the wonderful person or lots of money. Or some form of greatness, which is what I dreamed of in my 20s, to write some book that would outdo Shakespeare.” We are over-optimistic in youth about how much satisfaction we will get out of our future successes, he believes. “As we get into our 30s and 40s, we’ve achieved most of those things, but we’re not wired to sit back and enjoy our status. “The same ambition that made us status hungry makes us hungry for more status. We’re on the hedonic treadmill. We don’t feel the satisfaction we expected, so we think there’s something wrong with our lives.” As we get older, our values change. “You hear people say, ‘I don’t feel the need to check those boxes any more’, or ‘I don’t care that much what other people think’.” Older people feel relieved of a burden that makes it easier to savour other simpler pursuits such as spending time with grandchildren, a hobby or volunteer work. Rauch would like to see more help for people to relaunch themselves after this midlife transition, including greater opportunities for adult learning and companies creating more part-time positions or allowing gap years. “There’s a huge amount of untapped wisdom and potential to be unlocked. Because of the happiness curve, they’re often in a position where they want to give back. They want to be mentors, they want to be volunteers and they want to work at not so difficult jobs which allow them to use their skills.” Rauch has a few tips for relieving midlife malaise, such as talking to friends about it and understanding it’s normal. It is also helpful to stop comparing yourself to others, he says. But if all that makes no difference, give it time. As Rauch approaches 60, he feels ever more grateful for his life. He wishes he’d known this when he was in the trough of the curve because, as he says: “It’s worth the wait.”
10||Donald Trump says London hospital is like ‘war zone’ because of knife crimeDonald Trump on Friday fuelled fears of a knife crime epidemic in London by comparing a hospital in the city to “a war zone”, with blood all over the floors. The US president, addressing the National Rifle Association (NRA) convention in Dallas, made the inflammatory comments two months before he is due to make his first visit to the UK. Using a familiar conservative argument to defend gun ownership, Trump asked sarcastically whether vans, trucks and cars, which have been used by terrorists, should be banned. Then he turned to knives. “I recently read a story that in London, which has unbelievably tough gun laws, a once very prestigious hospital, right in the middle, is like a war zone for horrible stabbing wounds,” he said. “Yes, that’s right, they don’t have guns, they have knives and instead there’s blood all over the floors of this hospital. They say it’s as bad as a military war zone hospital.” Trump stabbed the air several times with an imaginary knife and muttered: “Knives, knives, knives.” He added: “London hasn’t been used to that. They’re getting used to it. Pretty tough. We’re here today because we recognise a simple fact: the one thing that has always stood between the American people and the elimination of our second amendment rights has been conservatives in Congress willing to fight for those rights. We’re fighting.” It was not immediately clear which “story” Trump had read about London, but a strong contender is a Mail Online article published last month. Its headline said: “Surgeon says he is regularly treating children in school uniform for gun and knife wounds in London hospital which is ‘like Afghan war zone’.” The article quoted a BBC Radio 4 interview with Martin Griffiths, a lead trauma surgeon at the Royal London Hospital in Whitechapel, where it said a record 702 stabbing victims were treated in 2017. “Griffiths said colleagues who served in the military likened their work at the London hospital to being back at Camp Bastion, the British forces base in war-torn Afghanistan,” Mail Online reported. Trump’s mother was British but there have been bumps in the transatlantic relationship since he took office. Theresa May, the first foreign leader to come to his White House, invited Trump on a state visit but that honour seems to be on indefinite hold. Last June, Trump criticised Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, hours after a deadly terrorist attack, based on a selective and misleading quotation. Khan’s office said the mayor had “more important things to do than respond to Donald Trump’s ill-informed tweet that deliberately takes out of context his remarks”. In November, May rebuked Trump for retweeting anti-Islamic posts by the far-right fringe group Britain First. The president, whose relations with France’s Emmanuel Macron appear far warmer, will finally make a “working visit” to the UK on Friday 13 July, immediately after a Nato summit in Brussels. Mass protests are expected. Khan tweeted last month: “If he comes to London, President Trump will experience an open and diverse city that has always chosen unity over division and hope over fear. He will also no doubt see that Londoners hold their liberal values of freedom of speech very dear.”
20||Build your own Adjaye: starchitects design catalogue homesWhat if buying a house were more like buying a car? Could the process of choosing between a Ford, Volkswagen or Nissan ever translate into picking between an Adjaye, Rogers or Assemble? Beyond the dream of ever being able to buy a house, the prospect of commissioning an architect-designed home is an impossibly remote prospect for most of us, a luxury confined to the glossy pages of Sunday supplements and Grand Designs. But a pair of London entrepreneurs with a background in fashion and marketing want to change that. Speaking with the optimism that only people coming from outside the world of property development can have, the founders of Cube Haus are planning to “disrupt the housing market” and offer “high-design homes at reasonable prices” with a range of off-the-peg, modular designs by well-known architects. For Philip Bueno de Mesquita, who founded sneaker brand Acupuncture in the 1990s, and commissioned David Adjaye to build a house in Kings Cross in 2004, it seemed like a no-brainer. “When you walk around Hackney,” he says, “you see these amazing new houses hidden away behind walls, which occasionally crop up on the Modern House” – an estate agent specialising in high-design homes. “But there are no developers rolling these out. Most buyers only have a choice between a period property or an uninspiring new-build.” In the same way that developer Harry Handelsman commercialised the exotic idea of “loft living” in Clerkenwell in the early 1990s, Bueno de Mesquita and co-founder Paul Tully believe they have spotted a desirable niche, and want to roll out architect-designed homes at scale. They have commissioned a roster of different designers – beginning with Adjaye Associates, Skene Catling de la Peña, Carl Turner Architects and Faye Toogood – to come up with a range of models that can be adapted to fit awkward infill sites and backland plots, with the bulk of the structure manufactured off-site in solid panels of cross-laminated timber. Given that the biggest obstacle to building new homes in London is access to land, they cleverly began their operation by setting up as land agents. Land Converter, founded in 2015, is styled as “specialists in buying and developing unused and awkward spaces”. If you want to sell off the end of your garden, an awkward garage, or even a bit of your roof, they’ll scope out the site, apply for planning permission and give you 25%-30% of the end value if successful. The landowner gets a say in which design is built, while the off-plan buyer has the headache of commissioning an architect and seeking planning approval taken out of their hands. “One-off house projects are so expensive to do,” says Bueno de Mesquita, speaking from experience. “But we can create economies of scale that make innovative architectural design accessible.” Tully says their lower margins and use of off-site production mean the end product will be 10%-15% cheaper than an equivalent house in any given area. Targeting peripheral locations where land values are lower, Cube Haus are currently working on two sites in Forest Gate, London, where they hope one of their three-bed homes will be available for between £650,000 and £750,000. Other sites are in pre-planning stage in Peckham, Sydenham and Ealing, with the first homes intended to launch on the Modern House later this summer, and ready to move in nine months later. The designs on offer range from a dark timber-clad box by Adjaye, seemingly modelled on his 2007 Sunken House in Hackney, to a stealthy courtyard house by Turner, and a simple pitch-roofed home by Toogood intended for more rural sites. Skene Catling de la Peña, architect of the magical Flint House, named RIBA house of the year 2015, has come up with a design that revolves around a central ceramic stove that rises through the building, containing the functions of cooking, heating, circulation and structural loading in one terracotta-clad core. The ceramic theme continues on the facade, with creamy clay tiles and a decorative base designed as a contemporary take on vermiculated rustication, with textured, wormy tracks cast into the surface. It’s full of the kind of crafted detail that would be unthinkable on most off-plan new-build properties. “The idea that you can have a repeatable design that works for all these tiny plots is quite a tricky proposition,” says Charlotte Skene Catling. “Our solution was to pull all of the complicated bits of the house into a central core, and then have the skin adapt to fit the awkward geometries of the given site. It feels more like product design than architecture.” With more than half of the buyers of new-build homes in England experiencing major faults with the fabric of their buildings, there is something to be said for treating housing more like a highly engineered product, with the level of quality control that a factory can achieve – rather than the usual medieval effort of throwing things together on site. The likelihood of planning objections could also be reduced, once the homes in question have become a tried and tested product, with physical evidence of exactly what will be built. But, crucially, the developer will have to prove that these modular designs can be properly adjusted to the specifics of each site, and not feel like a template that’s been airlifted in a priori, regardless of context. Beyond Cube’s relatively boutique offer, momentum for off-site manufactured housing is gathering pace across the country. Your Housing Group has entered into a £2.75bn joint venture with a Chinese state-owned construction firm to build 25,000 modular homes over the next five years, while even Berkeley Homes now has a target of building 10%-15% of all its houses using prefabricated techniques, trialled in its rather underwhelming Urban House model at Kidbrooke Village in Greenwich. Insurance giant Legal &amp; General has made the boldest claims so far, building a secretive facility near Leeds which claims to be “the largest modular homes construction factory in the world”, promising to churn out 3,500 homes a year. It may be faster and reduce construction waste on site, but the efforts it has revealed so far don’t bode particularly well for the design quality of these mass-produced homes. For all the efforts to dress them up with jaunty colours or stick-on bricks, most factory-made housing sadly can’t shake the whiff of its Portakabin ancestors. If the Cube Haus duo can raise the bar for design, while showing local authorities how their awkward little plots can be cleverly utilised, they’ll be doing something right, especially if the model can be expanded beyond detached houses. “The aim is to build up a portfolio of building types that can be scaled up for sites that can accommodate a bigger number of units,” says Bueno de Mesquita. “That’s when it starts to get really interesting: affordable housing designed by some of the most exciting names working in architecture today.”
13||Brentford’s Ollie Watkins: ‘We play some of the best football in the league’Three years ago Ollie Watkins was on loan at Weston-super-Mare, on the wrong end of a 3-0 defeat away at Bromley. A few days later he opened the scoring in a defeat against Basingstoke Town. “I can remember going to Whitehawk away, the pitch was terrible, the changing rooms were tiny and compact, it was wet and rainy outside and it was the worst possible day ever because we lost as well,” he says, breaking into laughter. “It makes you realise how far I’ve come. It is crazy but I am enjoying it and hopefully I won’t be playing back in the Conference South again and the only way is up.” It certainly looks that way. Brentford, after fighting off interest from elsewhere, paid Exeter City £1.8m for Watkins last summer and he has seamlessly slotted into Dean Smith’s forward-thinking, high-pressing side, leading the line for much of this season, scoring 11 goals. Last year Watkins was named the EFL young player of the year, an accolade given to Lewis Cook and Dele Alli in previous seasons. That six-month stint by the seaside, in which Weston battled against relegation to the Southern Premier League, helped him to mature on and off the pitch, he says, and although the leap from League Two to the Championship presented a different challenge, he notes similarities between the two clubs. “Both are under the radar. People think: ‘small Exeter’, ‘small Brentford’ and everybody just thinks: ‘they are a small team’,” he says. “But it doesn’t matter how big a team you are, all that matters is the football you play. You look at clubs like Sunderland, in the Premier League last year, not playing great football. I think we play some of the best football in the league and it can only get better.” Watkins, who was born in Newton Abbot, Devon, watched Torquay United every now and then as a child with his father but it was Exeter he joined at under-11 level after being rejected at his first trial as a nine-year-old. By the time Watkins was making his mark in the first team – he scored 22 league goals across two seasons, including an unforgettable rasping winner over Plymouth Argyle in the derby with his “weaker foot” – there was another youngster making a name for himself in the academy: Ethan Ampadu. “I can remember we did a double session and in the afternoon he came over to train with us in these small-sided games, him and another lad called Jack Sparkes,” Watkins says. “I remember it was like five-a-side, it was the older lads against the younger ones, he was about three years younger than us and I remember his team actually beat us. He is so calm on the ball, both footed; he’s got everything going for him. He’s a top young player; he is going to be unbelievable. It’s frightening to think how good he is going to be.” Ampadu joined Chelsea last summer, with the Premier League club told to pay up to £2.5m for the 17-year-old at a tribunal last month, and Watkins also moved on. Brentford, like Exeter, have form for developing talented, young players. This season Chris Mepham has excelled in defence, just as Alfie Mawson and James Tarkowski once did. Brentford’s slick style, Watkins says, suits him to a T but he acknowledges that at times they have been the architects of their own downfall. The season was almost two months old by the time they won their first league game and at times, Watkins says, they have been guilty of overplaying “like Arsenal”, the team he supported growing up. There are, however, high hopes for next season. “I knew when I came here that Brentford passed it, but not quite like this,” Watkins says, grinning. “It’s great the manager wants to play that way and we have the players to be able to do it. I’ve played in non-league when it’s long ball and it’s horrible, so I’ve gone from one extreme to the other.” Style is something Watkins has learned to love. His manager at Exeter, Paul Tisdale, is good friends with Ray Kelvin, who owns the Ted Baker brand, and last summer Watkins and his best friend, Matt Jay, the Exeter striker, were invited to do a week’s – paid – work experience at the company’s London headquarters. “All you see in the shop is the shirt on the mannequin so it was good to get a little bit of an insight into the behind-closed-doors operation,” he says. “It definitely gets you thinking with lots of different ideas going around, how they are thinking so far ahead and about inflation and things like that.” One day he found himself at the sharp end, asked to give his verdict on what would ultimately become this summer’s trends. “There were a ridiculous amount of clothes – you see so many you forget what they look like,” he says. “Ray called me into this room in this office and downstairs there were all these showrooms. He pulled me in and there were 35 women and some models. We were sat in a circle at the end of the catwalk and I just had to say what I thought of the outfit of the model walking down. Every time he would ask me and I would have 35 women looking at me for my opinion. I would say: ‘I like that or I don’t like that.’ I was brutally honest.”
4||Grandma’s traditional Jamaican wake brought me closer to the Windrush generationNatasha Gordon’s grandparents arrived in London from Jamaica – a three-week boat voyage undertaken by thousands of their compatriots – in the late 1950s. Her mother, then 16, joined them in 1963, finding work, a Jamaican-born husband and a reassuringly familiar West Indian community. As she grew up in 70s and 80s north London, the language, music and food of Natasha’s family life were steeped in the Caribbean island culture. “The first sound on a Saturday morning was pan lids. By 11.30am, the weekend’s food – mutton soup with dumplings, curry goat – was ready,” she says. Home had two meanings, she realised early on. “For my mum, ‘home’ – Jamaica – involved a different sense of identity and connection to the earth than ‘home’ – London.” So when Natasha’s grandmother, Louisa, died four years ago, it was to the rituals of Jamaica that her family turned. “Someone just said, ‘Oh, we must do a nine night, and there was no more discussion. We had to honour her and do it the right way,” Natasha, 42, recalls. The traditional Jamaican wake, the nine night, sees family and friends gather over nine consecutive evenings to swap stories, eat and drink. Overseeing proceedings is the departing spirit until, on the final night, it is ready to leave home for ancestral roots in Africa and eternal peace. “I had heard people say they were going to a nine. I’d probably been to them when I was little, but wasn’t really aware of it,” Natasha says. Like many children of immigrants, she realised, she knew neither what was expected nor what to expect. “We were supposed to understand it all, but how? For my grandparents and my mum, far from home, these traditions just made sense: they were comforting. But my generation lost touch with the rituals. Nobody had time to explain. They were busy just surviving, and we wanted to be the same as everyone else anyway. It can take a long time to appreciate your heritage.” Now Natasha, an actor and writer, has turned the “exhausting, intense” experience of her grandmother’s send-off – and the cultural and generational conflicts it highlighted – into Nine Night, her first play, a poignant comedy currently on at the National Theatre, London. Plot twists have been added (“It’s not my family on the stage”) but the inspiration for the characters, language and setting is clear. “I gave the designers a photo of my grandparents’ front room: religious icons, crocheted placemats, ornaments everywhere. For visitors to look at, not for us to play with. And there it all is, recreated on set.” Looking on, she can almost hear her childhood. “The sound system was next to the television. Grandad always had his music playing. Grandma always had her soaps on. It would be Coronation Street with dub bass underneath.” When her grandmother died, her grandfather put away his sound system. “The house became deathly quiet,” she says. “Music would have been totally inappropriate to him. He had lost his wife of 50 years. He was in shock. I remember him standing in the kitchen looking lost, as though he was trying to locate Grandma somewhere.” Practicalities fell to Natasha and her siblings, and, in common with several characters in her play, they set about organising their grandmother’s nine night more out of duty than conviction. “We just got on with it. ‘Who’s cooking the rice and peas? Who’s getting the drinks?’ And somehow all these people came.” Invitation was by word of mouth. “I don’t remember making any calls. People kept turning up. I would pick up the phone: ‘Ya hear Louisa dead? Ah is it? Me a go come.’” People began arriving around 3pm, bearing drinks, maybe a dish – “saltfish fritters, plantain. By the last night, it was like a wedding feast” – Natasha says. “They might stay all evening. It was not at all like a neighbour popping in for a quick cup of tea. You had to feed them. If people had made their way from south London to north London, they were there for the innings.” The catering, the sense of show and the endless conversation were physically and emotionally draining. “There were people from Grandma’s church, the allotment, Grandad’s pub visits, various jobs, all those 50s and 60s immigrants with so much shared experience. Women who last saw me years ago were annoyed that I didn’t have a clue who they were, protesting, ‘But I’m Joyce!’” The stories, some half-remembered from childhood, many new, were the highlight of the evenings. “I heard about them swimming in Jamaica, the jobs they did there, how they met, going to parties here, walking home because no cab driver would take them. It was stuff I had never asked about, the things we would have been told were ‘big people’s business’,” Natasha says. “I understood them as more than my strict grandparents. I could see them in Jamaica, or as young people, kicking about London as I would.” The differences between traditional British and Jamaican rituals around death, Natasha soon realised, were striking. “I had been to cremations and thought, ‘Oh, it’s over already. I haven’t worked up to tears yet.’ This is supposed to overwhelm. The emotion of grief is heightened so you can let it out. It’s like all your senses are being stimulated.” As the nights progressed, Natasha came to see that the process held different significance for each of Louisa’s relatives. “I was there for Grandad and my mum, but the nine night is as much about the spirit of the person passing well as it is about picking up the bereaved. Sometimes those needs seem to be conflicting.” When Natasha and her siblings were asked by their mother to rearrange the bedroom – a scene that, adapted, features in the play – they were horrified. In fact, they came to learn, nine night tradition dictates that furniture be moved, the spirit’s subsequent disorientation encouraging them to depart. “We were just looking at Mum. ‘Are you serious? Grandad has lost his wife and you want us to start shifting his bed around!’” They refused, a decision Natasha subsequently regretted. “It was so important to Mum, but we couldn’t see why. I have never felt more western than in that moment.” The disagreement marked a turning point. “We hadn’t realised Mum had such clear ideas about what mattered to her. My generation disconnected from this tradition, but I realised then that I needed to be open and curious, to step out of my British bubble.” Natasha began to reassess her childhood, to talk to her mother. “I had known Mum was quite spiritual, but I had always found her stories spooky. I couldn’t go into school and tell my white friends that my great-grandfather went into a trance and flew into a tree, so I shut her down a bit.” She had learned to hide minor ailments. “If you coughed, Mum was straight out in the garden with her scissors – I have no idea what she was growing – and boiling you up some revolting brew.” Now, she accepts, the cures always seemed to work. The recent revelation of deportation threats experienced by many of her grandparents’ Windrush generation has fuelled Natasha’s determination to learn more about the difficulties they faced. Arriving in Britain, she says, her grandfather was shocked to learn that many landlords had raised rents to price out immigrants. “He has dementia now but if he could make sense of this situation, he wouldn’t be surprised,” she says. With two children of her own, aged 11 and eight, Natasha’s desire to connect them with their heritage is strong. They attended the nine night and now love to hear their grandma Ruby’s stories. “They find Mum hilarious. She is funny, but Jamaican humour is direct. It can be cutting,” she laughs. Her mother’s voice features heavily in the play, Natasha says, but she has no reason to fear a telling off. Each year, she books flights for her mother’s trip to Jamaica. “There’s that pull to where she belongs,” Natasha says. “This time she asked me to arrange her return in August. I pointed out my play would have finished its run by then. ‘Ah yes,’ she said. ‘Well, just get me a programme.’” • Nine Night is at the National Theatre until 26 May. Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).
13||Sutton United’s push for promotion to League Two hits a plastic pitch snagSay the words “plastic pitch” to supporters of a certain vintage and images of wildly bouncing balls and goalkeepers wearing tracksuit bottoms to avoid carpet burns naturally come flooding back. But while the first-generation artificial surfaces used by Luton, QPR, Preston and Oldham in the 1980s have long since been consigned to history the continuing debate over the suitability of modern 3G pitches will come to the fore on Sunday. Sutton United’s National League play-off semi-final against Boreham Wood at Gander Green Lane sees the part-timers from south London attempt to round off a remarkable season by securing promotion to the Football League for the first time in their history. The only snag is that, under EFL regulations that ban artificial pitches, Sutton would not be allowed to begin next season in League Two and would instead face demotion to National League South if they did not replace their surface. “It’s not what we would like but that is what we will have to do. It’s as simple as that,” admits the Sutton chairman, Bruce Elliot, who estimates that a new hybrid grass pitch will cost around £300,000. “We’ve been through the wringer this season but we’ve failed dismally to convince the EFL that the question of artificial pitches should even be on their agenda.” Clubs in the EFL were invited to submit their view on the potential use of synthetic pitches at the start of the season, with the debate set to be continued at June’s AGM. Yet calls for another ballot have so far been resisted despite a tied vote on the issue in November 2014, while the Professional Footballers’ Association is among the staunch opponents having cited concerns about costs, increased likelihood of injuries and the “more direct” style of football artificial surfaces have been accused of promoting. “If you talk to chairmen in the EFL, then they don’t seem very keen,” says Elliot. “But when you actually ask them about why they object to it, they say: ‘Well of course we do train on it.’ So if it’s good enough for training, so much for injuries to the players. That argument goes soaring out of the window. There’s definitely people who still remember the old bouncy pitches. But people aren’t using the same computers they were using 30 years ago, so why would you think that what happened at Luton and QPR is anything like what is happening now? Technology has moved on hugely and it’s difficult to put your finger on exactly why there is so much opposition.” Sutton paid £500,000 to lay their pitch in 2015 and have enjoyed a meteoric rise since. Promoted from National League South in the first season, they secured a mid-table finish in the National League as well as making it to the fifth round of the FA Cup last season. Sutton’s players remain part-time, with much of the club’s income generated by renting out their facilities to the public during the week. “It still looks as good as the day it was laid,” says Elliot, who estimates that the pitch could last for another eight years. “I’ve not heard the one about high costs before. But if that is one of the objections, then it makes the whole process even more ludicrous. Nobody is forcing anyone to have a 3G pitch. All we’re asking for is that clubs in League One and League Two have the opportunity to put one down. There is an investment and we had to borrow money to do it but the financial model that’s around it is unbelievable. It’s used seven days a week, all day every day.” The Football Association’s chairman, Greg Clarke, guaranteed last week that all proceeds of the pending £600m sale of Wembley to Shahid Khan will be used to fund grassroots football, mentioning that “one in seven games was lost to the weather during the winter months and only one in three pitches in England was considered adequate to play on”. The FA Cup has permitted the use of artificial pitches since 2015 and a study last year found they provided “durable, safe, year-round playing surfaces, able to withstand intensive use and all kinds of weather”. “There’s a huge lack of facilities across the country,” says Elliot, “and that’s why the FA is so keen to push more because it guarantees that [people] don’t have to look at the weather forecast or ring up to see if the game is on. The days of pitch inspections are gone or at least they should be.” Sutton’s chances of reaching Wembley for a fourth time (and first since they were beaten in the final of the 1980-81 FA Trophy final) rest on Sunday’s meeting with Boreham Wood, who are also part-timers and defeated Fylde on Thursday night. The new National League play-off system ensures the teams that finished second and third host semi-finals at home, with Tranmere set to face Ebbsfleet, who finished sixth, after their shootout victory over fifth-placed Aldershot. “We’ve tried to think of it as a win-win,” Elliot says. “We’ve had a brilliant season just to get to the play-offs as a part-time club. If we get promotion of course we’re going to take it and lay a new grass pitch. If we don’t, it’s not a problem is it? We’d have another go next year.”
4||I do, again: ‘There is nothing as deadly serious as a second marriage’We arrived, my betrothed and I, at the register office to give notification of our marriage. It was the last possible moment we could have done it, because my divorce took so long to come through and his was so long ago that he’d lost the piece of paper. It was also the emergency walk-in morning, so everyone else needed an urgent death certificate, or was a too-old baby who’d missed the registration deadline. Tensions were high and everyone seemed on the point of tears, because they were bereaved, or they were seven weeks old. I gave notice here the first time I got married, when the registrar was a Guardian reader and said merrily, “Well, I can’t see anyone coercing you!” I was hoping we didn’t see the same guy, though I’m sure they have a protocol for that, like waiters in restaurants when you go in with different dates on consecutive nights. I never changed my name the first time, as my children already had their father’s surname and it never made me doubt my maternal status. The only other reason (I thought) was as a gesture of self-erasure in preparation for becoming Wife which – as you may well imagine – I do not agree with. But now there are three possible surnames in my family, the only one who shares mine is the dog, and I urgently want a merger. My betrothed is called Will Higham, which would make him William Higham Williams. It would be cool, needlessly baffling, like Ford Madox Ford. “Will you be changing your name?” asked a lady of impossible gentleness. “Yes, we’re both changing our name to Higham Williams,” I said. “No, no, that was just something we said as a joke.” “It wasn’t for me.” “You’re not the one who’ll end up with the ridiculous name. Come back to me when you want to be called Zoe Madox Zoe.” “I would be fine with that.” I’m getting married – you’ll have picked this up by now – for the second time. I have a son and a daughter, 10 and eight; Will has a daughter of 10 (though this is pure coincidence, not because we went on Soulmates with “single parent, preferably of 10-year-old” as a search term). There wasn’t an engagement as such: when we went to his mother’s vicar’s wedding two years ago, and his daughter said, “Will you two marry here?” I said, “Sure, if you like.” Then Will pointed out that would be absurd; this was a church. And I said, “Your mother would be pleased,” and he said, “We’re not doing it for other people.” And suddenly we were doing it. The general view of a second wedding is that they’re a bit of a joke. Not a contemptible joke, more of a puzzled, “Why’s she getting married again? She must be one of those people who just enjoys getting married. Wait, they’re both divorced? They’ll be at it again in a couple of years, to two completely different people. It’s probably an excuse to dress their children up in novelty costumes.” A couple of close friends said, “Why do this twice?” as if I were eating another oyster when I already knew I was allergic. I couldn’t really explain without saying something soppy, like, “I want to die with this person, and when I look around for him just as I go, I want the woman in the hospice to say, ‘Your husband has stepped out for some air,’ not, ‘Your partner has gone to the vending machine.’” So instead I said, “Piss off.” A hardcore of bystanders will infer from a previous marital breakdown that the person is flaky – for which see Germaine Greer’s not entirely disapproving comment about Meghan Markle: “I think she’ll bolt. She bolted before. She was out the door.” Logically, it makes sense – people who don’t stick at things won’t stick at things – but statistically it doesn’t, as second marriages are more likely to last than first ones. I can explain this anomaly with a sometimes overlooked fact about divorce. It is hell. It’s never billed as hell, it’s billed as the emotional midpoint between being bereaved and changing your bank account. But it isn’t. It’s seven months face-down on the floor for a third of every day before you can even say the words, “I’m getting divorced.” So in fact, there is nothing as deadly serious as a second marriage. The death-wish rubric which is somewhere between an anachronism and a metaphor in a first marriage is now completely literal: you will definitely be parted by death, because you definitely will not be parted any other way. As a result, I observe the marriage of Prince Harry and Markle with a profound fellow feeling that I have never before had for a sleb-come-princess, and doubt I will have again. She may have fame and finely turned ankles up the wazoo, but we’re sisters under the skin, in our quest for permanence, slightly sheepish, desperately sincere. You might presume that a second wedding is quite liberating, in that you can finally make authentic decisions and you don’t have to invite your relatives (or Theresa May, say). In fact, the main liberation – and this might be more me than the Waleses – is that you don’t have any money. Wedding inflation is society’s way of policing the institution, making sure that people do it only when they really mean it. Lovebirds can say what they like, but the proof comes when they put their money where their mouth is: spend 750 quid on a cake, or £65 on a garter. Second time around, those shackles are off: you don’t need invitations, you can send an email. People reply with amusing remarks (it is against the law to RSVP amusingly to an invitation printed on a card). You don’t need a strict head count because there ain’t nobody poaching any salmon. You don’t need a photographer because everyone has a phone, and you don’t need a DJ, because you already asked everyone what their favourite song was in what will go down in history as your solitary act of forward planning. We chose a working men’s club as the venue, which I knew was nearly free, because I “hired” it (for free) for a hustings before the election in 2015. That didn’t work out so well, in the end, because we said everyone was welcome and 200-odd people couldn’t fit into it and had a mini-protest outside about democracy (Harriet Harman had to go and calm them down). Then we went in one afternoon to confirm and it looked different, without 200 protesters in front of it… less festive. Like a place that, once you were in, you weren’t necessarily allowed out. Inside, it was full of signs prohibiting weird things such as letting your children use the slot machines or starting fires. “Have we taken this budget thing too far?” asked the future Mr Williams. We’re already getting married on a Wednesday afternoon because the council has a midweek special (“It’s fine,” said my stepsister, “I’ve always hated going to work on a Wednesday anyway.”), in a dress I bought in a charity shop, and a suit he inherited from an uncle of eerily similar dimensions. “We could find somewhere nearer our house?” I suggested. Will said he’d already examined and rejected most places near our house the last time he got married. This came as a huge surprise to me. Obviously I knew that had happened, but I’d filed it in some different dimension, the 20th century or the moon. Nobody can mention the last time. It mars the gaiety, awakens the spectre of failure. Yet, inexorably, people are constantly reminded of the last time you got married, because you’re getting married again. A lot of sentences start, “Do you remember?”, then tail off into a shambolic silence. I’m currently in a constant state of garrulous reminiscence, not just my own first wedding but every wedding I’ve been to; my dad’s second wedding where I think I was technically a bridesmaid but not sure (drunk); a slew of summer weddings, including my sister’s, when I was pregnant and looked cranky and ginormous in all the pictures, like a bad fairy godmother arriving with a curse; weddings I was late for; a wedding where we breakfasted on cows the bride had persuaded her father to slaughter from his own herd. I always used to complain about something, usually the sense of captivity, that it is actually quite bizarre to find yourself in a social event with a minimum attendance of 12 hours. That’s another thing you don’t have do the second time: entice people to the middle of nowhere in order to trap them. But the point, I realise belatedly, is that you always remember them, quite discretely. None of these events have merged in the memory, the way Christmases do and you can tell them apart only by figuring out who was still alive and who yet to be born. There’s something pagan and comical about the excess, the acres of time, the extravagance of dress, the big prose, but none of that is what holds each one apart from any other. It is a marital paradox, that in this conventional act, you carve your union into a memorable, distinctive entity. I never realised how conventional I was until I found myself in an unconventional situation. I don’t want Will’s daughter to be a sort-of stepdaughter, I want her to be my actual stepdaughter, with paperwork and photos, and commemorative hair accessories. She and my son are only two weeks apart in age and have quite similar colouring, and people always say, “Twins?” and I invariably say, “Yes”, and Will says, “It’s a little bit more complicated than that”, but too late, because I’m already describing the football hold (a breastfeeding position for twins). Last week, I was trawling my local high street looking for samosas that could somehow arrive hot even when there were 1,000 of them, thinking, “What were the chances? That I would get this old and feel so not-old?” My incredible good luck rushed towards me like a tide. The twins are old enough to be trusted with all the stuff that normally you’d have to distribute among your friends while agonising over the hierarchy. My stepdaughter is naturally eloquent; my son is naturally sardonic. Remarks will be heartbreakingly touching, and very short. The youngest wants to dress as a member of WICKED, the nefarious organisation that experiments on people in The Maze Runner, which I think is the best idea I’ve heard. It’s frankly incredible how many people are free on a Wednesday afternoon. And if I seem insouciant, it’s not because I’m not taking it seriously, or I feel some residual coating of shame at re-entering an institution I’ve already traduced once. It’s because in that great chasm between how things are and how they look, I should be gnarled by time and experience, but instead I feel more hopeful, more trusting and idealistic than I have ever been. And soon, before summer has really begun, I’ll be Mrs William Higham Williams. • Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).
0||Ichiro Suzuki: the secretive superstar who defied baseball's steroid eraThe baseball world into which Ichiro Suzuki walked in 2001 was one of swagger, bravado and brawn. Only two years before, Nike marketed baseball with an unfortunate slogan: “Chicks dig the long ball.” Everything was about home runs. The game’s steroid era was at its peak, still a year away from a scandal that would expose sluggers’ muscles as chemically gained. Ichiro, who essentially retired from playing at the age of 44 on Thursday, cast a diminutive figure in that time of giants. He was slender, almost frail, insisting he should be called by his first name only, something rarely done in American sports. The best baseball fans knew about his nine-year career in Japan, one in which he had 1,278 hits and had established himself as his country’s most electric player. But watching him early that first season with the Seattle Mariners, lunging at pitches with a spinning, awkward swing that looked like a mini-tornado, you had to wonder if he would ever hit a good, hard fastball. That was until he hit those fastballs. And the sliders and curves and splitters too. It turned out the brilliance of his game came in the fact he didn’t take mighty swings like all the muscle-bound home-run hitters of his time. Instead he slapped grounders and bloops that he turned into hits with his electric speed. The most exciting play in baseball that season wasn’t a blast to the bleachers, it was Ichiro hitting a ground ball to shortstop and beating the throw to first base. The outfielder who appeared too small to survive a league bloated on steroids was baseball’s best player in 2001. He hit .350, had 242 hits, stole 52 bases and threw out runners from right field with throws so long and true they were almost impossible to believe, even as he made them. In each of the three years before Ichiro arrived, the Mariners had lost a superstar (Randy Johnson, Ken Griffey Jr and finally Alex Rodriguez respectively). He made Seattle forget them all, leading the team to a major league record 116 victories. Who could have imagined a player who was already 27 with a game built on speed would still be playing nearly two decades and 3,089 hits later? But that was Ichiro. He forever defied expectations and continued to play into his mid-40s, a mystery to the end with a need for privacy that bordered on obsessive. Ichiro distrusted the mob of Japanese journalists who followed him from game-to-game, rarely seemed to relax in the clubhouse and – until relenting later in his career – hid behind a veneer of secrecy. Because Ichiro was big news in those early years, I spent a good amount of time writing about him, picking away at the wall he erected. There was the afternoon I sat in the empty, hilltop ballpark above Kobe that had been his home stadium for nine years in Japan, imagining what it must have been like to watch him in those days at the start. There was the night spent in an Osaka hotel bar with the gregarious hitting coach who had preserved a young Ichiro’s swing when everyone else thought it too awkward and demanded it be changed. Each conversation, each visit came with a warning from those close to Ichiro: these intrusions would displease him. Ultimately, the warnings were flares thrown up to chase away the curious. Ichiro never pushed back against the stories about his life. Instead, he ignored them, batting them away, the way he seemed to swat at an imaginary fly before assuming his batting stance. He leaves the field with a trail of jaw-dropping highlights, the ones everyone mentions. The laser throw to third base that caught Oakland’s Terrence Long. The inside-the-park home run at the 2007 All Star Game. But the moments I remember most are not from the games. They came hours before in empty stadiums, when I observed him practice his bunts over and over until he had found the perfect feeling of ball deadening against bat. I loved his batting practice because it was when this slight player would unleash the slugger he kept tucked inside and launch booming home runs off the restaurant on Safeco Field’s second deck. It was an Ichiro few got to see. It was the one I could watch all night. In the end, though, his career stands as a monument against the era in which he arrived. He was the superstar who did not have to turn his body into a bloated, cartoonish replica of a muscle man. He didn’t have to hit home runs. He didn’t need to be big. At a time when baseball had lost the simplicity of what made the game great, he was a reminder that a ground ball to shortstop could be more exciting than a home run.
24||Just the ticket: Interrailing with the familyWhen I told my friend I was going interrailing, she laughed. “Interrailing! So will you be listening to The Cure and trying to snog 18-year-old boys?” Unlikely – although I knew what she meant. Back in my twenties I, like everyone I knew, went interrailing. But I’d never considered it for a family holiday until a 52-year-old friend returned raving about it and I woke up to the notion that I didn’t have to spend a fortune on peak-season airfares. I looked at the Interrail sites (interrail.eu and myinterrail.co.uk) and discovered that the prices remain fixed year-round, and that under-12s travel free. That did it. I planned our trip and my partner Richard, our seven-year-old daughter Hani and I took off for two-and-a-half weeks over the Easter holidays. I wanted to get to mountains and coastline that I hadn’t visited before, and make it a round trip. So I picked a route to Slovenia through Germany and Austria, and back via the Swiss Alps. After getting the Eurostar to Brussels we took a train to Cologne then boarded the sleeper to Vienna – or in our case, the non-sleeper. It started well. We settled Hani into the top bunk and sat back with our complimentary mini bottles of prosecco and gazed at the twinkling lights of passing castles and villages along the Rhine. Magical. Until Hani poked her head over the side of the bed and declared she couldn’t sleep. Four hours later I was squashed into the top bunk while she was snoring below. But it didn’t take Hani long to acclimatise to train travel. I’d worried she might be restless but the rail journeys were among the most harmonious times we had. She even started writing a diary. The soporific motion of the train, the scrolling scenery and, not least, copious audio books and picnics helped. The next night we caught up on sleep in the modern, sparkling Vienna Meininger hostel (three-bed room from €54) then took the early train through green mountains to Ljubljana, capital of Slovenia, breaking our journey halfway with a quick look at Maribor. In Ljubljana we walked through cobbled streets up to the castle, where Hani was transfixed by the remains of a pit into which prisoners were once hurled. That night we slept in the youth-orientated but central Hostel Tresor (dorm beds from €20). I woke on Easter morning to pealing bells and slipped out alone, following the sound to St Nicholas’ Cathedral where a lavish service was under way, complete with incense, choir and orchestra. But it was time to swap cities for wilderness, and a two-hour bus ride took us to Lake Bohinj. It’s “pure nature”, the bus driver said as he dropped us off – and it turned out to be the highlight of our trip. Deep in the Triglav national park, Lake Bohinj is less spoiled than its glamorous sister, Lake Bled, and has a surfeit of attractions: mountains, a lake, boats, a gorge, alpine flowers, hiking trails and skiing. We stayed at Pod Voglom (dorm beds from €16), a large, old hostel that reminded me of Scottish hostels I visited in my twenties. It even smelt similar: slightly woody, with late-1970s decor that made me feel strangely at home. The road ends at Lake Bohinj, whose calm, clear waters are glorious for swimming in the summer (the hostel rents canoes and paddleboards, as well as bikes). It’s a short walk to the hamlet of Ukanc (meaning “the end”), where the only way on up is by the cable car that runs to Vogel, 1,537 metres above sea level. All of a sudden we were in a ski resort, the snow still impressive in April. Hani and Richard took off sledging while I sat in the glaring sun and watched the skiers: tiny dots running like raindrops down vast white slopes. I want to return in the summer, when the snow has melted, to walk the Vogel Trail among the wild and beautiful Julian Alps. We left reluctantly and headed down, by bus and train, to the picturesque seaside town of Piran, Slovenia. It’s a walkable warren of narrow streets, squares and terracotta roofs, but thin on beaches. Here it was warm. We felt as if we’d skipped a couple of seasons as we ate ice-creams with the sun bouncing off the creamy stone of the Venetian-influenced pedestrian square. For a change from picnics, we found a restaurant, Fritolin Pri Cantini, and enjoyed an alfresco seafood lunch. We stayed at an Airbnb, the two-bedroom Nature Relax apartment (€57). From Piran we took a bus to Trieste (about two hours with one change at Koper) before boarding the train to Venice. By this time we’d begun to feel part of the scenery, the slow immersion of train journeys becoming part of us. It was evening when we arrived at the AO Hostel Venezia Mestre (family room from €62.60), which is spanking new, comfortable, family-friendly and in a semi-industrial suburb away from the sights (and crowds). Hani, feeling a bit weary, stayed at the hostel with Richard, giving me a chance to jump on a local train into Venice proper, 10 minutes away, and get cheerfully lost among its canals and squares. We spent all of the next day exploring Venice by foot and vaporetto (canal bus), avoiding the crowds by escaping down side streets and into the serene Peggy Guggenheim museum. In the lagoon, vast ships, menacing cities on water, ploughed implausibly past gondolas. On the fast train to Milan, we streamed through the flat, green Po valley before changing for a local train that ran alongside Lake Como then rose towards Tirano, close to the Swiss border. A short cab ride took us to the quiet hamlet of Sernio and a pretty, restored 16th-century rectory that is now Il Seicento hostel (family apartments from €106 B&amp;B). Tirano is lovely, with a beautiful, ornate Renaissance church overlooking the central piazza. It was another place we would happily have stayed longer, exploring trails in the Valtellina by bike or on foot, but we were booked on the scenic Bernina Express for the two-hour, 40-minute ride from Tirano to Bergün, Switzerland. We boarded the distinctive red train, with its panoramic windows and were soon winding through tunnels and clouds towards the Ospizio Bernina station on a dramatic, snowy pass 2,253 metres above sea level. We then corkscrewed down towards Bergün, a village so pretty the council thought it a wheeze to “ban” the taking of photos, claiming it wasn’t fair to make those less fortunate jealous. We stayed in a stylish Airbnb apartment (from £45) with patio doors that opened on to the mountains. Hani had found the mountain idyll of her imagination. She was in Heidi-land. Invigorated, we walked up and out of the village, through lingering snow, then after three nights took the train to Innsbruck, to catch the sleeper back to Cologne. This time, Hani slept. After two-and-a-half weeks she had adapted to change and travel, but was looking forward to normality. I, on the other hand, was sorely tempted to use the rest of my precious month-long pass and just keep going on this adventure. • Train travel was provided by Interrail.eu. Accommodation was provided by Hostelworld, Airbnb and Hostel Tresor How to do it Types of pass Interrail passes are available from interrail.eu, or myinterrail.co.uk. A “global” pass allows travel in 30 countries within a month. This includes journeys on Eurostar, although you have to pay a reservation fee (see below), to and from the UK (not covered if you buy a cheaper “one country” pass). Passes can be bought up to 11 months in advance, and prices are the same year-round, except for periods with promotional discounts of 15%, that come round about three times a year. Prices Passes – and prices – vary according to frequency of travel. For example, a pass for five days of travel in 15 days costs £171. A pass for travel on every day in one month costs £418. There are also passes available for 7, 10, 15, 22 days of travel within a month. Passes for single countries are also available, with prices varying depending on the country. Two children aged 4-11 years travel free with each adult, but children must still have their own pass. No passes are required for under fours. Sleeper trains cost extra. For example, a three-berth cabin on the Cologne to Vienna sleeper cost an added €54pp. Reserving trains Reservations must be made on certain trains, at extra cost: this is €30 for Eurostar, €20 for night trains and €15 for high-speed international trains. Domestic trains are free with your pass. It’s advisable to make reservations two months ahead (Eurostar says at least three months are best for its services).
18||Shaggy and Sting, Janet and Cliff: the eight weirdest collaborations in popHave you ever wondered, perhaps in a darker moment, what an album featuring noted lutenist Sting crooning alongside sporadic novelty hitmaker Shaggy might sound like? Well, wonder no more, because last month they unleashed 44/876, an “island-influenced” collaborative album that honours “the duo’s mutual love of Jamaica”. If you’re now thinking: “OK, but why?” then Sting has the answer. “The most important thing to me in any kind of music is surprise,” he told Rolling Stone. “And everybody is surprised by this collaboration – by what they’re hearing. We’re surprising.” Indeed. Another “surprising” recent collaboration was Q-Tip and Demi Lovato who have “reimagined” Elton John’s Don’t Go Breaking My Heart, while 2018 has also graced us with Charlie Puth trying to keep up with Boyz II Men, Justin Timberlake saying nothing with only-famous-in-America human beard Chris Stapleton and Sheryl Crow trying to keep her composure while the bloke from Britpop also-rans Reef shreds his larynx on My Sweet Love. With head-scratching musical pile-ups set to continue, we look at some of the best, AKA worst. Destiny’s Child &amp; Matthew Marsden It is weird to think that in 1998 it was rugged soap star-turned-rugged pop star Matthew Marsden who probably had to be convinced to work with Beyoncé. After signing a half-a-million-pound record deal with Columbia Records, having impressed them by a 12-month stint as a mechanic in Corrie, Marsden was paired with labelmates Destiny’s Child (first album lineup) for a perfunctory cover of Hall &amp; Oates’s She’s Gone. Beyoncé etc do the absolute minimum, barely masking the fact that their bits in the video were clearly shot in a record label office, likely on a separate continent to Marsden, with a record label employee holding the door shut. Michael Jackson &amp; Eddie Murphy Eddie Murphy and Michael Jackson’s earnest Whatzupwitu (opening line of the video: “The elephant is dying”) tries to communicate man’s ills via the medium of cheap-sounding R&amp;B. One explanation for its existence is that Jackson only agreed to do it as part of a deal to get Murphy in his Remember the Time video a year earlier. Why else would noted perfectionist Jackson agree to be in a video that was apparently created using the very first iteration of MS Paint? “Always in the trees,” Jackson sings with underserved gusto while an illustrated heart is superimposed on to his forehead; “Always in the seas,” he warbles while a shower of musical notes rains down. At the end, as a crudely drawn dove of peace flutters by, Murphy clamps his hand over Jackson’s mouth, probably to stop him shouting for help. Coldplay &amp; the Chainsmokers Coldplay have always worried about staying relevant, even when their stage outfits suggested otherwise. As early as 2004, Chris Martin co-wrote and appeared on Jamelia’s See It In a Boy’s Eyes, following that with a collaboration with the then white-hot Nelly Furtado on 2006’s All Good Things (Come to an End). In 2012, he brought serial collaborator Rihanna into the fold on Princess of China, wise to the fact she can make anyone in her radius cooler by proxy, even Jonny Buckland. In 2017, aware that streaming rules the charts and faceless DJs are Radio 1 catnip, Coldplay sidled up to US dance bros Chainsmokers for the brainless Something Just Like This, which was a Top 3 hit in the UK and US. Fingers crossed this leads to a Calvin Harris v Starsailor remix of Alcoholic. Jay-Z &amp; Another Level Around the same time that Beyoncé was busy re-reading her contract and ignoring Matthew Marsden’s messages, future husband Jay-Z was in a similar bind. His Roc-A-Fella Records imprint had signed a deal in the UK with Northwestside, who, as it so happened, had a new boyband by the name of Another Level; they, coincidentally, had some space on a remix for a big-name US rapper. The song was Be Alone No More, and while Jay’s verse wasn’t awful, he might have been rethinking his choices when he realised his remix only peaked at 11 in the UK, five places lower than the original, Jay-Z-less version. Kanye West &amp; Thirty Seconds to Mars Obviously Kanye West isn’t exactly adverse to the unexpected collaboration – Fall Out Boy, Adam Levine, Estelle – but even during his most charitable moments there’s always been a sense of perspective. That went out of the window in 2010 when he collaborated with Oscar-winning egotist Jared Leto and his side-project Thirty Seconds to Mars on Hurricane. Over Leto’s strained vocals and a backing track that would make Muse wince, Kanye whips out his vocoder for some nonsensical burbling that really should have stayed locked on someone’s hard drive. Janet Jackson &amp; Cliff Richard By 1986, after her first two solo albums had flopped, Janet Jackson was talking a lot about control. Control of her personal life (she’d recently annulled her marriage to James DeBarge); control of her career (she’d fired her controlling manager, father Joseph); and control of who she was as an artist (she’d hired producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis). You have to hope that in among all that annulling, firing and hiring she sought the requisite level of revenge on whoever came up with pairing her with Cliff Richard on 1984’s Giorgio Moroder-produced Two to the Power of Love. While a naive young Janet goes for playful and coy, Cliff delivers his lines like a Tory MP reciting grime lyrics. Wu-Tang Clan &amp; Texas The Brit awards has form when it comes to chucking together artists and seeing what happens. We’ve had Robbie Williams and Tom Jones for the mums, Klaxons and Rihanna for the kids, and Florence Welch and Dizzee Rascal for the self-loathing. In 1998 they gave us Texas and, erm, the Wu-Tang Clan via an unnecessary reworking of every estate agent’s favourite sex jam, Say What You Want. To be fair, it wasn’t directly their fault. “[The Brits producers] were like: ‘We want you to sing with Smokey Robinson,’” explained Texas’s Sharleen Spiteri in 2015. “I went: ‘Nahhh. Listen, don’t get me wrong, I’d cut off my right arm to sing with Smokey Robinson, but that’s what people are going to expect us to do.’” So she got her good mates Method Man and RZA down to London to do the song they’d just recorded and, lo and behold, that age-old question of “Do the Wu-Tang Clan care about their legacy?” was finally answered. David Guetta et al ... Since capitalising on the EDM boom, 50-year-old French DJ and producer David Guetta has worked with almost everyone. Seriously. This man’s iPhone address book is basically a who’s who of every bandwagon-jumping artist signed to a major label. It’s not just your typical dance music-adjacent pop stars, either. Give me the name of an unexpected collaborator and chances are he’s twiddled knobs in their vicinity. Stereo MCs? Yep, they’re on 2004’s amazingly titled Guetta Blaster album. Lil Wayne? Oh yes, on a 2011 album track that unfortunately also included Chris Brown. And before you say Ladysmith Black Mambazo, thinking you’re all clever, they appeared on Lift Me Up, a No 157 hit in France from 2014.
19||The Order of Time by Carlo Rovelli review – no difference between past and futureTime is a commodity: ours to buy, spend, save, keep, mark or waste. Time has volition: it flies, drags, stands still. The verbs alone suggest that we have always understood time as subjective, something experienced according to individual circumstance. But they also suggest we may be a little confused about the journey from then to now. We are right to be confused, according to Carlo Rovelli’s elegant and wonderfully brief summary of what we do and don’t know about time. “One after another,” he says “the characteristic features of time have proved to be approximations, mistakes determined by our perspective, just like the flatness of the Earth or the revolving of the sun.” Forget about universal time, a simultaneous now across the cosmos. In 1972, physicists sent a quartet of caesium clocks jetting around the planet in different directions to confirm Einstein’s special relativity. People who live at altitude really do have more time, as do people who stay still. The difference as measured on an atomic clock is counted only in billionths of a second, and we on Earth can conveniently ignore this temporal untidiness. But everything in the universe is in motion; everything feels gravity’s grasp. Time shifts with both mass and velocity, to be different at every point in the universe: we live, Rovelli says, in a “spiderweb of time”. There is a more profound puzzle underlying this spacetime confusion. At the deepest level of mathematical physics, time does not exist at all. There is, according to Rovelli, just one basic equation that points to an arrow of time: the second principle of thermodynamics, which says that entropy is always increasing, that the journey from order to disorder is down a one-way street. We observe this journey because heat flows towards the cold things and one day all the heat will have dissipated, and we will experience neither past nor future. “What makes the world go round are not sources of energy, but sources of low entropy.” That suggests we can be sure of a before and an after, but that is only because we see the world as an approximation, and not as a buzz of its ultimate constituents, a ferment of atoms, and beyond the atoms, a fizzing of subatomic particles that in turn may be thought of as quivering fields embedded in yet more gravitational and electromagnetic fields. Reality is not what it seems – the British title of Rovelli’s popular book from 2016 – and at this level there is no evidence of time, let alone direction. “The difference between past and future, between cause and effect, between memory and hope, between regret and intention … in the elementary laws that describe the mechanism of the world, there is no such difference.” In a quantum world, with neither what we understand as substance or order, there are only events, which crowd around chaotically. A freshly emitted electron is just a cloud of possibilities until it slams into a screen. A kiss is an event – where is it now? – but then so, ultimately, is a stone, or a planet. Nothing is for ever, not even diamonds. None of this is new. Aristotle and St Augustine both wrestled with the protean question of time, and Rovelli takes his title from the only words written by Anaximander known to have survived the last 26 centuries. There is a paradox of course: even fundamental physicists count the days and contemplate the years. Time, Rovelli suggests, is not to be considered a fundamental entity of creation, but rather a property that emerges from a set of variables, and a special perspective, in the way a football team emerges from a group of kids who have decided to play football. We can consider our local circumstances as a special subset of the universe where entropy “is low in the past, the second law of thermodynamics obtains; memories exist, traces are left – and there can be evolution, life and thought”. Time, as evidenced by our language for it, becomes more easily appreciated as a set of layers, a complex collection of structures, and our use of the word “when” becomes a matter of social and personal convenience. In a sense, we make time. Rovelli is a professor of physics at Aix-Marseille University, with a close interest in an intellectual monster called quantum loop gravity, and this book is a re-examination of, and a reframing of, one of the enduring questions of the philosophy of nature. It is a joy to read. That does not mean that his reasoning is always easy to follow, and when you close the book you still won’t know whether time really exists, or not. But you will have a sharper sense of why you don’t know. He writes easily, vividly and brilliantly: – he is as at ease with Beethoven’s Missa Solemnis as he is with Boltzmann’s constant – closes the work with a contemplation of time’s milestone: mortality. Verses by Horace launch each chapter, one of which ends with a couplet from the Grateful Dead. As he says in one of those throwaway observations that make The Order of Time a delight: “Perhaps poetry is another of science’s deepest roots: the capacity to see beyond the visible.” The Order of Time by Carlo Rovelli (Allen Lane, £12.99). To order a copy for £9.75, saving over 20%, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&amp;p of £1.99.
19||Wendy Cope on Erith: 'A place few people have heard of and even fewer can pronounce'I was born in Erith, Kent, a place few people have heard of and even fewer can pronounce – the first syllable rhymes with beer, not with berry. The late comedian Linda Smith was born in the same town. She once said: “Erith has a suicide pact with Dagenham.” Dagenham is directly opposite Erith, on the north side of the Thames. My father was the managing director of an old-fashioned department store: Mitchells. Although I was often in Erith, we didn’t live there. Our house was in Barnehurst, a very ordinary outer London suburb a mile or so to the south. Erith is mentioned in Conrad’s Heart of Darkness, when the protagonist sails past it on his way down the Thames at the start of his journey to Africa. As for Barnehurst in literature, the only thing I can think of is a poem of mine that refers to the bus depot and the Wimpy Bar in the adjacent parade of shops. There was some culture going on there during my childhood. My friend Dave Gelly, the jazz musician and writer, who grew up in the same area, told me that the Red Barn pub near Barnehurst station was the centre of the postwar revival of British jazz. I was entirely unaware of it. In Erith there was a theatre. I appeared there as a small child in a rabbit costume when my ballet class put on a performance. And we often went as a family to amateur operatic productions. The lasting result of this is my love of Gilbert and Sullivan. It wasn’t instant – at first I was often dragged along reluctantly. But as I became familiar with the tunes and old enough to appreciate the humour, I began to enjoy them. I’m still annoyed by people who are snooty about G&amp;S. Sullivan wrote wonderful tunes and Gilbert was a genius. He has certainly influenced my work. I’ve written several poems that borrow forms he used, most recently one called “At 70” that goes to the tune of the Major–General’s song from The Pirates of Penzance. Erith was not prospering in the 1950s. Its riverside location reduced the catchment area and many shoppers preferred its nearby rival, Bexleyheath. Mitchells closed down in 1960 and shortly afterwards the town was redeveloped. My parents moved away in 1963. When I visited Erith a few years later, it was unrecognisable. Barnehurst had remained stolidly the same. Although the family was based in the area until 1963, I only lived there full time until I was sent away to boarding school at the age of seven. After that it was just the school holidays. As a teenager I took advantage of the half-hour train journey to central London, where I would meet school friends and go to the theatre, most often the Old Vic. When I began writing poetry I was troubled by a vague feeling that a poet needed to have grown up in a beautiful rural environment, or at least somewhere exciting. Then I read Philip Larkin’s poem “I Remember, I Remember” about his childhood in Coventry, “where I did not invent / Blinding theologies of flowers and fruits”. His lines helped me to believe that maybe I could be a poet, despite having grown up in an unremarkable suburb.
7||Meera Sodha’s vegan recipe for green pea, black-eyed bean and chickpea usalIndia is a country of 1.3bn people who live across 29 states from the Himalayas to the Indian Ocean. But, despite that huge regional diversity, it often feels as if the same boilerplate menu is served in Indian restaurants. Today’s recipe for usal, from Maharastra, a mixture of pulses and peas in a light, spiced tomato broth, is one I’d love to see more UK restaurants adopt. Green pea, black-eyed bean and chickpea usal You can swap the beans and pulses listed for whatever you have to hand: I particularly like sprouted mung beans in my usal, but they’re not easy to find in shops, and take a few days to sprout from scratch. This is best eaten with a hunk of bread for mopping up the spicy juices. Prep 12 min Cook 30 min Serves 4 4 tbsp rapeseed oil 2 red onions, peeled and chopped 2 green finger chillies, very finely chopped 4 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 2 big vine tomatoes, chopped 1 ¾ tsp salt 1 tsp ground kashmiri chilli 1 tsp garam masala 1 tsp ground cumin ½ tsp turmeric 1 x 400g tin black-eyed beans, drained 250g frozen petit-pois, defrosted 1 x 400g tin chickpeas, drained 200g mangetout 1 tbsp lemon juice 1 large handful coriander leaves, finely chopped Heat the oil in a pot over a high flame and, when hot, add the onions and chillies, and cook for 10 minutes, stirring frequently, until the onions look like pink jewels. Stir in the garlic, cook for two minutes, then add the tomatoes. When the tomatoes have broken down and become paste-like (around five minutes), add the salt and spices, and stir-fry for a minute. Pour one litre of water into the pot, bring it to a boil, then turn down the heat to medium and leave to bubble away for eight minutes. Stir in the beans, peas, chickpeas and mangetout, cook for about five minutes, then take off the heat. Mix in the lemon juice and coriander, and adjust the seasoning to taste. Divide the peas and legumes between four bowls, ladle the spiced broth on top and serve. Food styling: Amy Stephenson
4||The secret to… preparing your daughter for her periodsTalk about it… a lot. Your daughter will probably have been taught the basics in school, unless she is experiencing early puberty, but there’s still a sense of mystique or taboo. Don’t whisper, and don’t exclude the men and boys in her life – although she may prefer discretion. Keep reinforcing the fact that it’s normal. Be aware of the signs. If she can be alert to what her body is telling her, the process may seem less random and troublesome. Physical signs such as cramps, spotting and discharge may be fairly obvious, but mood swings, headaches and generally feeling out of sorts can all be tracked on a calendar or diary. If a monthly pattern emerges, this can be helpful. Familiarise your daughter with the kit. Get a stash of pads, or show her where you keep your own. Let her try one out, so that she knows how to use it. (Maybe defer tampons or mooncups for now.) If her first period seems imminent, it might be wise for her to carry a pad in her school bag. Be clear that this is part of the process of growing up. It doesn’t mean she’s a different person, and it certainly doesn’t mean that she’s become a woman overnight. If she still wants hugs, or to sleep with her favourite cuddly toy, that’s fine. And if she’s out of sync with her peers, she needs to know that her body is simply developing at its own pace. Finally, this is her business, not a moment for sharing on social media. • The Girls’ Guide to Growing up Great, by Sophie Elkan, is published by Bloomsbury
8||'Guns down, paintballs up': the US trend for settling feuds with paintball warsIn videos pouring on to social media from cities across the US, young men are seen brandishing weapons, calling out rivals and firing as people scatter down blocks and around buildings. The point of it all? Gun violence prevention, according to the people involved. The weapons fire paintballs and participants say it’s a way of settling feuds and disagreements that might otherwise have led to real gunfire. “In this generation everybody’s fascinated with guns,” said Jarret McClain, a paintballer in Durham, North Carolina. “But if you got paintball guns and you know nobody can get hurt and it won’t cause nobody’s family to cry, at the end of the day it becomes fun shooting at people.” McClain credits the Atlanta rapper 21 Savage with sparking the recent wave of interest in paintball after he posted a number of videos to social media in early April calling for “guns down, paintballs up” as an alternative to gun violence. McClain said it’s been effective too, and that his crew had already settled three separate vendettas with other groups through paintball. “These dudes we’ve been feuding with for like one or two years, all of the sudden they just wanna squash the beef and have a paintball war,” said McClain, an aspiring rapper who added that he was no stranger to real firearms. Besides Atlanta and Durham, the trend has caught on in Detroit, Milwaukee and Greensboro, North Carolina, as well. Typically small groups and cliques of young men target one another, riding in vehicles and taunting rivals in social media posts on Instagram and Snapchat. The threats are often menacing, appropriating language from more serious threats of violence, but the actual battles are mostly approached as fun. In many of the paintball war videos that now litter YouTube, participants can be heard laughing and joking throughout. But not everyone is laughing. In a Monday press conference, Sgt Melissa Franckowiak of the Milwaukee police department said that her department had seen 65 incidents in just a three-day span last weekend. “It’s kind of morphed into something other than what [21 Savage] anticipated, I think, and now these kids have been shooting unsuspecting citizens as opposed to their friends in these paintball wars.” A handful of Milwaukee residents told the Guardian they had first-hand experience of these kinds of random incidents, including Theresa Hall who said her daughter was struck while walking to her grandparents house over the weekend. “She wasn’t injured but I’m pretty sure if this keeps happening someone will be,” Hall said. Paintball “markers”, which often look like and are referred to as “guns” use compressed gas to propel gelatin capsules filled with dye out of the barrel. The devices have been popular for battle-simulation based games since the 1980s but are generally illegal to use in public areas. Without proper protection, paintball impacts can cause bruising, welts, and can cause serious injuries to the face and eyes. Authorities had mostly been treating the street battles as a nuisance, but are growing concerned that its anti-gun violence intentions can backfire, as it appears to have in at least two cases over the past month. In Atlanta on 1 April, three year old T’Rhigi Diggs was killed by a stray bullet after a 15-year-old allegedly opened fire at a car that had peppered him and others in a parking lot with paintballs. The teen, Christopher Cullins, was arrested 10 days later from his middle school and charged as an adult with murder. According to the Atlanta Journal Constitution, 21 Savage, though he personally had nothing to do with the case, happened to be a friend of T’Rhigi’s family and paid for the funeral. Then in Greensboro, North Carolina, on 20 April, 19-year-old Zyquarius Bradley was shot and killed in an incident that authorities “strongly believe” was tied to paintball wars. Just hours before Bradley was found shot, police had confiscated paintball guns and ammo from Bradley, whose car was splattered with paint the night of the homicide. No arrests have been made in the killing. The police captain, Nathaniel Davis, said the department was going to ramp up enforcement around paintball-related crimes. “This is not safe and this is not something that’s acceptable,” Davis told a local news station. Last week Detroit’s police chief, James Craig, called the paintball campaign “well-intentioned but misguided”. Police there have made at least six arrests in connection with paintball activity and said that they had taken 95 related calls for service over the course of the week. “Any effort to reduce violence in our city or any city around the country we appreciate,” Craig said, “but having paintball wars across the city is not the way to do it.” One of Craig’s main concerns is how similar some paintball guns look to real semi-automatic weapons, especially those that feature detached air canisters. The concern was echoed by Franckowiak in Minneapolis. “If you’re doing it to an unsuspecting citizen,” he said, “and they’re not aware that it’s a paintball gun, and it happens to be a [conceal carry permit holder] or a police officer … there is a potential for you being shot and possibly killed.” McClain said point blank that he was not worried about his next paintball weapons (his last two were recently seized by police) being mistaken for real guns. As for the concerns of citizens and law enforcement, he said he understood them and thought players just needed to be more discerning. “The people who are involved in the paintball shooting stuff, they should know there’s boundaries,” McClain said. “If y’all wanna have a war, go into the woods.”
19||Modernists and Mavericks by Martin Gayford review – Bacon, Freud, Hockney and the London paintersMartin Gayford has been talking with artists for 30 years. He doesn’t just nip into the studio with a notepad: he has a gift for sustaining conversations that unfold across decades. His friendship with David Hockney has inspired remarkable collaborations, and when he sat for a portrait by Lucian Freud he made in return his own version of Man with a Blue Scarf, a written portrait of the painter painting. In Modernists &amp; Mavericks he draws on a huge archive of interviews to piece together a history of postwar painting in London, from the Camberwell students of the 1940s, working in the ruins of a bombed city, to the pop artists who collaged images of shining new-made lives in the 1960s. Gayford starts with people, moments and meetings, standing firm in the belief that “pictures are affected not only by social and intellectual changes but also by individual sensibility and character”. Three cheers for that faith in individuals. Other studies have debated the effects of state art funding and cold war cultural politics; this one brings us the expression of Leon Kossoff as he moves through heaven and hell with each brushstroke, Bridget Riley introducing the whisker of white that makes a black painting live, Gillian Ayres and Howard Hodgkin talking hour after hour in the car down to Bath School of Art. Many of the painters here were sceptical of interpreters pinning them down with words. But with each other they could be unstoppably voluble. Francis Bacon went around conducting “a mobile seminar”. Frank Auerbach (the most grippingly eloquent of the book’s voices) says that he and Bacon “talked, slightly drunkenly and wildly, for about 15 years”. As for Auerbach and Freud, the conversation went on for half a century. The book’s span allows Gayford to plot several generations in relation to each other, and it’s striking how many of the most potent encounters involve forms of teaching. Simply walking down the street one day, Bacon pointed out to the young John Wonnacott how a shadow seemed to eat into a figure “like a disease”. “I rethought shadow,” says Wonnacott; it stayed with him all his life. There are dismal fallings-out at art school: Allen Jones, amazed that his tutors had omitted to mention the existence of Jackson Pollock, suggested suing Hornsey College for fraud. But David Bomberg emerges as a deeply valued teacher at Borough polytechnic, whose students inherited his convictions about the uncompromising effort that painting requires. Effort and seriousness united the London artists. The Colony Room Club bar in Soho filled up after many a dinner at Wheeler’s, that’s true, as well it might after what Cyril Connolly called the “chopless chop-houses and beerless pubs” of the 40s. But the talk was never far from painting, and the next morning there was work. Gayford attends particularly to the relationship between long concentration and sudden achievement. For Kossoff, tirelessly painting a swimming pool in Willesden, north-west London, there would come a point when “conscious intention breaks up”. It was then that “the picture happened”. Kossoff and Auerbach stayed close to Camden; Freud thought it mad to travel when there were parts of London he had not visited. The particular environment of the city is perhaps most clearly felt in the account of what happened when Bacon ventured to St Ives, though the episode is also a welcome reminder of the vitality of British painting elsewhere. But the biggest news was coming from the US and everyone was forming some kind of relationship with the ideas coming from the new centre of the art world. Peter Blake posed in his Levi 501s, with American badges pinned to his jacket and Elvis magazine in hand, portraying himself as a gawkily dedicated fan. The picture has the wistful air of Watteau’s Pierrot, Gayford observes; there’s Gainsborough here, too, and Rousseau. It’s a beautifully complex self portrait of a young Englishman dressed for America. New York and Los Angeles were the places to be; Hockney, Jones, Frank Bowling and Richard Smith all eventually went. But powerful work could come of not being there. The giant force of abstract expressionism intensified debates about whether external subjects had any role in the life of a painting. Was the “hard-edged abstraction” pursued by Robin Denny and William Turnbull a leap into the future or a dead end? If a Sandra Blow painting “put you in mind of landscape” was it then a figurative work? The conversations of Ayres and Hodgkin were charged by the fact of their work falling just (but decisively) to either side of the “invisible frontier” between abstraction and representation. Ayres is a vivid presence and Gayford gives a fine account of her vast, tumbling, ever metamorphosing Hampstead Mural. He records her laughter as baffled onlookers wondered what she was doing. Ayres died last month, Hodgkin last year. The great figures of the 60s are passing – which is all the more reason to be grateful for a book that takes us right into their world. • Modernists and Mavericks: Bacon, Freud, Hockney and the London Painters by Martin Gayford is published by Thames &amp; Hudson. To order a copy for £18.95 (RRP £24.95) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99.
8||Lebanon election likely to reaffirm status quo in country riven by dysfunctionNine years and two collapsed governments since the last election, Lebanon goes to the polls on Sunday with leaders touting a new beginning for a country bedevilled by debt and dysfunction, but voters fearing more of the same. The long-awaited parliamentary election had been hailed as a potential turning point for a state beset by decades of war, a turbulent domestic scene and a neighbouring crisis that has posed new threats. As polling day has drawn nearer, however, it has become increasingly likely that the result will reaffirm the status quo of a powerful, elite-run patronage network with entrenched channels of influence. For opponents of prime minister Saad Hariri’s government, this spells trouble. “The country is going through serious social, economic and political challenges that will translate into disastrous consequences if the same elite runs the country, with the same mindset that it did the last 30 years,” said Gilbert Doumit, a candidate in Beirut for a new list, Kulna Watani. A complicated electoral law drafted for the vote was supposed to give more room for plurality and merit-based candidates to emerge in a political scene that has taken root around civil war-era former warlords and sectarian leaders. Established political blocs, however, rather than newcomers, look set to benefit from the high threshold required to win a seat. The result could continue to marginalise candidates standing on civil society platforms. One such campaign, Beirut Madinati, emerged during municipal elections three years ago but has since made little impact away from the capital. Lebanon’s large working class population remains wedded to the traditional structures, analysts say. That means a showdown, in some form, between two rival blocs that emerged after the assassination of the former prime minister Rafiq Hariri in February 2005. Dubbed March 8 – a pro-Syria and Hezbollah movement – and March 14 – a pro-western counterpart – the two movements have dominated Lebanese politics ever since. March 14 was briefly ascendant until 2008, despite more than a dozen of its loyalists, including MPs, journalists, and security officials, being killed. Since then, the powerful Hezbollah has dominated Lebanese affairs. The reluctance of political rivals to challenge the group in any other forum but a national poll is testament to its power. “For many in Lebanon, the salons of leaders’ palaces are the gateway to the state,” said Mohanad Hage Ali, the communications director of the Carnegie Middle East centre in Beirut. “In the case of Hezbollah, this process takes the form of a network of institutions, hospitals, schools, higher education institutes, religious seminaries, social services and publishing. “The party is the country’s largest publisher, and the second largest employer after the state. So when we talk of a challenge by independents and civil society to the state in this elections, we have to bear in mind that fair competition is non-existent, and the caps on spending don’t apply to the big players, who either draw on the government’s resources, or regional funding to maintain their large and effective networks. “The power of the Lebanese political elite, comprised of former warlords and sectarian leaders, is based on the client-list networks. Basically, the sectarian leaders take on the functions of the state, mostly through its institutions, providing public jobs and services to their constituencies.” After five years of self-imposed exile, the figurehead of March 14, Saad Hariri, returned to Lebanon in late 2016 to form a government. That led to the election of a president, the March 8 icon Michel Aoun, who partnered Hezbollah and won the group’s endorsement. Ever since, the country has been perceived to have been in the orbit of March 8 – informally allied to Iran, and on slowly warming ties with Syria despite a formal policy of disassociation. In late 2017 Saudi leaders, who until then had been Hariri’s patrons, summoned the prime minister to Riyadh and told him to resign. They had taken umbrage at what they saw as Iranian consolidation under his new government – a sign of just how sensitive the fragile state is to regional dynamics and what little room it has to manoeuvre by itself, even if it tried. Once back in Lebanon, Hariri announced he was suspending the resignation he had tendered while in Saudi Arabia and, aside from that chapter, his return has brought relative stability to the country. It has done little, however, to address rampant corruption, nepotism and soaring national debt. Almost all public services remain poor, and there is popular resentment at festering piles of rubbish and regular power cuts. “The powerful remain committed to this electricity debacle because they are invested in the current system,” one senior political figure said. “They are running diesel through gas plants. There are kickbacks involved.” Hage Ali said that current levels of corruption and inefficiency were not sustainable but that “the status quo is not capable of reforming itself”. Doumit, the Julna Watani candidate, said: “If the same political elite and their allies are all re-elected, then the status quo will mean a continuation of unacceptable electricity cuts, lack of a reliable water supply, and a very poor waste management system that leaves garbage rotting in the streets. “Whatever the outcome, we will continue fighting to achieve proper representation and accountability mechanisms that the Lebanese people deserve.” Fouad Makhzoumi, a Sunni candidate and potential rival to Hariri, said: “If change doesn’t happen, Lebanon has a bleak future. My feeling is that this election will start the process, but it needs another election to truly put the country on a new path.” Daniella Daou, a 21-year-old political science graduate, said civil society candidates still stood to make an impact, even if they failed to win seats. “With the exposure they get now, they will probably have influence as lobby groups. The electoral districts, though, have been drawn to fit the warlords.” Additional reporting by Nadia al-Faour
1||Sean Penn: ‘Some of my best laughs have come out of the worst reviews’Sean Penn walks into a low-key restaurant not far from his house and slides undetected into a seat at the back. It is a misty day in Malibu, 15 miles north of LA, and the actor appears in familiar, I-don’t-care guise: beat-up leather jacket, brushfire hair (which, in light of the views he will air about female vanity in Hollywood, I feel bound to report may be more vibrant than nature intended), with the jittery energy of a man who has stood for too long next to very loud speakers. The 57-year-old greets me affably, to my surprise: while Penn may be long admired for his acting, he is denigrated for almost everything else. He is known to be pugnacious, short-tempered, long-winded, a man who yells at photographers and smokes on TV. And now he has written a lunatic novel. “It’s the most fun I’ve had professionally,” he croaks and leans back in his chair. A few days before our meeting, Bob Honey Who Just Do Stuff was the subject of a full-page newspaper ad in which the publishers, rather cleverly, ran lines from the book’s worst reviews and asked readers to make up their own minds. The novel, which follows the adventures of its eponymous hero as he goes around selling septic tanks and murdering old people, is a satire of American consumer culture and the cult of image, and for weeks its excesses have been gleefully documented. Penn writes as if every word has been put through a thesaurus: for “face”, read “dermal mask”; for “quiet”, “lingering symphony of silence”; a man with good hearing has “extraordinary auditory augmentation efficiency”. So it goes on, until we reach: “Effervescence lived in her every cellular expression, and she had spizzerinctum to spare.” Cherrypicking these extravagances has provided us with a jolly good laugh, but here’s the odd thing: taken as a whole, there is something quite thrilling about Bob Honey, a hallucinatory effect that makes the novel at times almost feel like a piece of performance art. Linger long enough in the world of Penn’s prose and one starts to lose all purchase on reality, a sort of brain slide that Penn insists was intentional. “It was meant to be challenging,” he says. “Meant to have you stop-the-rhythm to go and look something up.” If he talks in a word fog, it is because he prefers “to be understood by osmosis. If I’m being brief, I assume [people] will fill in, or if I am not being brief” – the far greater likelihood, on the evidence of our chat – “the tangents would be connected by the other person.” He hoped the book might work along similar lines. The result, while largely insane, does provoke an emotional response in the reader and for that reason alone might be judged a success. “I wrote the Sean-by-osmosis version in about 30 days,” Penn says, after which “I rewrote for two years”, before selling it to Simon &amp; Schuster, where “I got lucky; Peter [Borland] totally got the book. I felt I was being supported by a really smart reader.” Was he edited? “He wasn’t looking to change anything,” Penn says cheerfully. “But he did send me great notes which said, ‘I don’t understand this. Do you want me to?’” (In most cases Penn replied “yes”; in some, “not so much”.) The suggestion he was indulged because of his celebrity is one he finds baffling. “No, because I wouldn’t have done it any other way. When people listen to the advice they get, it usually robs the soul of the piece. In the movies, they’re not thinking about whether it has impact on them; they’re thinking about whether it will impact the box office.” This rather quaint view of publishing – as an industry devoid of commercial principles and certainly not the kind of business that might judge a book by a famous actor to have greater value as a car crash than as something more credible – is the main source of Penn’s enthusiasm for novel writing, which he sees as a less mediated form of expression than acting. But why would he trade in something he is indisputably world class at – Penn has won two Oscars, for Milk and Mystic River – for something he is indisputably not? The answer is burnout, what he calls “my great source of alienation from my peers, actors who would rather sell a movie than make one”. Where these actors are “brands”, and where even a movie he loves “is the sum of compromises at its best”, Bob Honey, by contrast, is “all mine. It’s been said you never complete a film, you abandon it, and I didn’t abandon this. I stand by every line exactly how I wrote it.” Has he seen the worst reviews? “I have a sense of them. It’s keep-your-day-job shit. A bunch of children, schadenfreude, whatever. And in the end, some of the best laughs I’ve got have been the one-liners that have come out of the worst reviews.” Through long espousal of leftwing politics, including vocal protests against the Iraq war and support of Hugo Chávez and Raúl Castro, Penn is used to being unpopular. Does it hurt to be mocked? “Well, mocked means the person’s an idiot.” Penn smiles crookedly and shutters his lids. “I’m not vulnerable at all.” There are two images of Sean Penn that rival the memory of his greatest screen roles. Up there with Carlito’s Way, or Dead Man Walking, or his role as Harvey Milk – the 2008 biopic of California’s first gay elected official and a performance for which one could almost forgive Penn any amount of bad behaviour off-screen – there is the shot of him in a boat rescuing survivors of Hurricane Katrina, and the one of his handshake with Mexican drug lord El Chapo. The latter, taken two years ago when Penn interviewed El Chapo for Rolling Stone, brought down on his head almost as much opprobrium as Bob Honey, for its perceived amateurism and for the way it seemed to apologise for a man with so much blood on his hands. Penn remains unrepentant. “Just because someone writes about stuff doesn’t mean they know about it. I know fathers who don’t know their own families. Most of these journalists on this subject know fucking nothing and most never read my piece. They read the excerpts. Then you get a talking head like a Don Winslow [on CNN], I’ve read his books cover to cover and he’s a functioning moron, and people think he’s something. That’s their resident expert. It’s like Henry Kissinger is their resident expert.” The gung-ho activism is more complicated and, on closer inspection, much more admirable than the caricature suggests. If there is precedent for Penn wading into a job about which he knows nothing and nailing it through sheer bloody-mindedness, it is here, in his experiences with aid. In 2010, Penn went to Haiti in the wake of the devastating earthquake and set up the J/P Haitian Relief Organization, an agency that has, by all accounts, been enormously successful and helped thousands of Haitians find shelter and medical relief. In a piece in the New York Times in 2011, by which time Penn had been in Haiti for almost a year, veteran aid workers lined up to praise him. The question of what he was doing in Haiti in the first place has roots in his inability to find equilibrium at home. The most persuasive passages in Bob Honey are those in which Penn writes of his character’s insomnia. When I ask if this comes from experience, he takes a big breath. “So this goes back as far as I, or my mother, can remember. I was born at 3.45am and I generally fall asleep at 3.45am. I’ve been to Zen centres, done sleep studies, everything. I could never get myself to go to sleep. I’d get up, sometimes, with no sleep at all. And I was getting older, so I wasn’t able to push through this thing mentally.” Eventually a doctor prescribed Ambien: “But it doesn’t work like it used to. It doesn’t keep me asleep, but I get to sleep and at least get three hours. Then you’re watching the clock for the time you have to get up, and it’s getting closer and closer.” Some of Penn’s wilder behaviour makes more sense, perhaps, when looked at in the context of a man who has never had more than three unbroken hours’ sleep. “Yuh. Judgment issues,” he says, raising his eyebrows in what is almost certainly a reference to the time, in 2009, when a court made him attend anger management classes after an altercation with a photographer. It probably didn’t improve your temper, I suggest. “No. Nor the thoughts that lead to a temperamental response.” One result of this is that Penn often feels himself to operate best in crisis mode. He quotes a line from Cutter’s Way, a movie from 1981 starring Jeff Bridges and John Heard in which a woman kills herself to get away from her alcoholic husband, and the final line of which is: “You know, the routine grind drives me to drink. Tragedy, I take straight.” “There’s been a lot of that in my life,” Penn says and he relates it, obliquely, to how he is able to function effectively in a destabilised environment such as Haiti after the earthquake. “I think tragedy can also be urgency. I find myself going calm, and being demanding. I can bring an American arrogance to anywhere in the world.” He smiles. “Look, in the movie business you tell your crew: ‘I need this set done yesterday.’ When I got to Haiti and I saw how NGOs worked, it would be like: ‘This patient needs this, now, and this is the person to get in touch with.’ Then I had six other people asking me six other things. When I circled back half an hour later to the first one and said, ‘Did you get it?’ they said, ‘We’re waiting for a response, we sent an email.’ I said, ‘You sent an email? Give me your phone, I’m going to call.’ And it drove me fucking mad.” Pretty quickly, Penn’s outfit became known as an agency that got things done quicker than the NGOs and he calls it “the easiest kind of work to do in an emergency, because it’s emergency related”. It was triage. He nods. “It’s the easiest, commonsense work. There’s a kid in the street, a truck’s going to hit it, do you know that the sidewalk is clear of paedophiles? No. I’ll make my apologies later.” It is fascinating that the self-important urgency of a Hollywood movie set can be translated to a disaster zone, but think about it, Penn says: “It’s the same business, the stakes are higher.” There’s even overlap with the sanitation logistics of shooting a movie. “You’ve gotta get porta potties for people.” Was he surprised when allegations were made last year that aid workers, including Roland Van Hauwermeiren, the head of Oxfam in Haiti, used sex workers? “I don’t know why it wasn’t a bigger scandal earlier. I was reading about it in the Haitian press when I was in Haiti in the beginning. Roland Van Hauwermeiren was probably the best country director of an organisation there. Of course, you’re not the best anything if you’re looking the other way on that stuff. Or, worse yet, if you’re participating.” In his own organisation, Penn had a policy of “no tolerance” right down to the rule that “if you smoke one joint, you’re fired”. In fact he ended up relaxing the drugs rule for his indigenous workers, because “how am I controlling that when my local workers went back to their homes at night? I stopped being an idiot with that.” For the imports, mostly Americans or Brits, however, “You don’t come to this country to break its laws.” And when someone in his organisation did break a rule? Well, Penn says, “There’s no organisation, including my own, where you don’t have something happen. And you deal with it; you certainly want to take it transparent.” The cover-up, he says, is the biggest problem. “I’ve known of situations where big organisations discovered something and did an investigation, and fired somebody – and because they didn’t want a lawsuit from that person, another organisation would hire them; it’s like passing on priests. In our organisation, I’d get on the phone to whoever the violator was and say, ‘If I hear you are ever trying to get a job in one of these organisations, I’m coming to your home town, and I’m going to rent out the movie theatre and show a documentary about you and make sure your parents are there.’” Why does he think an aid worker, who presumably starts out with good intentions, gets to the point of exploiting desperate women this way? “I can have theories,” Penn says, “but they’re the same theories one would apply to someone who abuses their children. How do you do that?” In light of these life-or-death stakes, Penn is unsympathetic to what he seems to regard as more trivial abuses closer to home, particularly those involving celebrity exposure. A week before we meet, he appeared in the gossip columns for dining with Charlie Rose, the disgraced former TV host fired from PBS and CBS for inappropriate behaviour around female staff. Penn is not, it is safe to say, on board with #MeToo, which he describes as “not intellectually honest”, “a movement led by mania” and full of “self-aggrandisement and venting”. At the end of Bob Honey, he writes a poem defending Charlie Rose and appearing to lament the demise of Louis CK. Clearly, I say, Penn thinks his friend was mistreated. “He says one thing happened; other people said another thing happened. I wasn’t there. What I do think is we maybe should be very careful; for example, are we now going to say we will never celebrate Thomas Jefferson again: slave holder, that’s all you are? Charlie Rose provided one of the only sophisticated dialogue programmes, and I don’t know what the percentages are, but I know that there are some lies that have been told publicly about people; I know of some serious omissions. I’m talking about women towards men.” This is a personal issue for Penn, who in 2016 won a court-appointed apology from the director Lee Daniels, who erroneously implied the actor was guilty of domestic violence. Romantic relationships don’t seem to be Penn’s strong point. The worst bits of Bob Honey are those involving the character’s ex-wife, a harridan called Helen, about whom he is so vicious, I had wondered whether Penn’s own ex-wife might have commented on it. Penn gives me a dry look. “Which ex-wife?” he says. Oh. I had momentarily forgotten about Madonna, to whom Penn was married from 1985 to 1989. “The mother of your kids,” I say. (Penn and Robin Wright, who were married for 14 years, have Dylan and Hopper, both in their 20s.) “No; these characters are amalgamations of a lot of things and she’s not a character in the book.” Penn pauses. “I don’t think the book would be either one of my ex-wives’ cup of tea. They both thought that I talked too much in ways that were too complicated.” He laughs. “I don’t have a lot of conversations with my most recent ex, but my first ex, we have a close friendship.” What does he think Madonna would say about the book? “I think if she was reading it, she’d say, ugh, I’ll read this some other time.” Anyway, Penn says, returning to the subject of #MeToo, “I don’t ever want to be in a movement. I don’t trust any movement. The anti-war movement did not sustain. We’re back in wars.” But going back to his friend Charlie, surely the lesson of this is: don’t wander around naked in front of your staff if you don’t want to get sacked. “I don’t disagree with that,” Penn says. “I go back to my original thing, which is that if that’s what the individual that happened to is asking for, then they have a legal case to go through, or the company has a decision to make. But when the company is making that decision under the pressure of… a movement that is led by mania, I get worried for both [sides].” There is a libertarian streak in Penn that is impossible to miss. I repeat a wince-making line from Bob Honey, which Penn almost certainly considers to be a liberal statement: “Getting older in America is tough on a woman; seeing what she’ll do to avoid it is tough on a man.” I assume Penn approved of Frances McDormand’s unadorned style at the Oscars this year? He takes a big breath: “When my kids were growing up, there was a thing called the surgery channel and I would watch this thing and get into hysterical laughter. One slice and you’re a human body! We’re the fucking same! But where I really became a giggling 12-year-old girl was volunteering for cosmetic surgery: you have someone who’s anaesthetised, and they’re doing the most vile things to them, and I would get so hysterical. You bring up Frances McDormand. What do you do to be more beautiful than that? That fucking woman walks into a room and you don’t know if you want to kiss her, eat her farts or bite her toes off, you just want to be around that energy.” As opposed, he says, to “the vanity that errs on the side of violence against oneself, physical violence. It’s crazy.” But there are market forces at play. You’re still viable as a leading man at 57; a woman is not. “But isn’t it changing? There’s Meryl out there. Also, in terms of the social/sexual part of it, I think more and more – I mean my ex-wife just married a 30-year-old guy she met two months earlier. [Wright is reported to have married a French fashion PR manager earlier this year.] You see that dynamic shifting. When I would try to console a woman in the business who maybe wasn’t getting the opportunities I was because they were a woman, I’d say, well, which parts are you not getting? Because, man or woman, most parts are shit. Most movies are shit. If you look at the really talented women – Julianne Moore never has trouble getting a job. The opportunities are there.” Does he understand why his countrymen voted for Trump? “I have a pretty good idea. We became celebritised,” he says. “I don’t buy People magazine. But when people complain that someone took a picture of them or that their privacy is being invaded, I’m like, yeah? Fuck you. I just spent my entire adult life with you telling me that because I want to express myself as an actor, that that comes with the territory. Well, it comes with the territory for you, now, and you bought those fucking People magazines. You made that happen.” He is jabbing his finger at me across the table. “When I go like this, I’m not at my best,” he says. “So two sides that are not at their best, it gets very shallow.” Penn has a disdain for the idea of the personal brand. “Branding is being! Branding is being! The algorithm of modern binary existentialism,” he writes in Bob Honey, a line I read out to him now. “Yeah,” says Penn, lowering his eyes and looking sage. What does “the algorithm of modern binary existentialism” mean? He snaps his eyes open. “Well. Binary – two components. When you’re taking an algorithm that’s going to identify the two components, and, there are, I think I talk about in the book also… it’s America today.” There follows a long story about how easy it is to buy components for a bomb in the US. “I’ve just gone off on the word binary. But I think it’s self-explanatory, in there. Huh.” Anyway, he says, the reason people voted for Trump is “because I think there’s a mental health problem in this country. It’s rage over reason. There’s a lot going on that was going on in Nazi Germany; we’re finding scapegoats, groups to hate, whether it be of a race, or so-called lefty Hollywood, so that’s part of why I want to write something – I only have my sense of humour to offer. I didn’t want to just be angry all the time.” And he isn’t. There is an underlying humour to Penn’s rants that is often lost in translation and while I find much of what he says preposterous, arrogant and occasionally delusional, to my surprise, I also find him likable and funny – a genuine American eccentric. As we get up to leave, I can’t help laughing. “Sorry. I keep thinking about the fact that Madonna thought you were boring.” “I love her,” Penn says, and laughs. Is she a good egg? “Such a good egg.” We go outside to his pick-up truck and he introduces me to Flyboy, his six-month-old golden retriever. After Penn has gone, I call a friend with a degree in philosophy. “Does ‘the algorithm of modern binary existentialism’ mean anything?” I ask. After the laughter has died down, he says, “I think he means… in modern life everything is black and white. But existentialism refers to a specific tradition in philosophy; he surely just means existence.” No matter; Penn has a lot more to say. Before leaving he told me: he is hard at work on Bob Honey, the sequel. • Bob Honey Who Just Do Stuff by Sean Penn is published by Simon &amp; Schuster at £14.99. To order a copy for £12.74, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).
20||Joe Lycett: Why I am the greatest artist in the worldI am the promise guardian to a wonderful girl called Grace, a role akin to a godfather but without the Christian responsibilities, as I am a devout Jedi. Grace loves painting and a couple of years ago we decided to paint a mural in my office in Birmingham. As we worked, I asked her, out of curiosity, “What do you think art is?” She was 10 at the time and pondered quietly before responding: “It’s trust.” I asked her to expand on “trust”. “If you trust something’s good, then it is.” The girl is a profound genius. That is exactly what art is. Cut to an average Thursday in March this year – it’s midday and I’m mixing my first martini of the day when an email slips into my account from the Royal Academy of Arts. You heard. It reads: “Thank you for submitting images of your artwork CHRIS. The Members of the Summer Exhibition have considered them carefully and would like you to deliver your artwork to the Academy for the final round of judging.” At first the news was a shock. How was I, nothing more than a court jester and a drunk, suddenly being considered as an artist? Surely a clerical error? But then I remembered Grace’s theory, that art is trust, and it hit me: I am the greatest artist in the world. Perhaps who has ever lived. And CHRIS is my masterpiece. I’ve been making weird little sculptures for the last couple of years after seeing an album cover for Nitin Sawhney’s Beyond Skin, which consists of a stunning, lifelike bust of a man screaming at the sky. I thought it was so cool and powerful and I wondered if I could recreate something similar. I have since discovered that I cannot. Turns out it’s bloody hard to make a sculpture that looks like a human head, so I’ve not bothered. Realism is for squares. Instead I have been making clay heads that my mate Matt describes as “beef-textured relics of hate”. CHRIS is my finest to date, made while drunk last summer – he has a shimmering open smile with wild, adventurous eyes, wonky bone structure, and is totally brilliant. I hadn’t considered CHRIS’s worth until I spoke to another artistic genius, Harry Hill. We had just recorded an episode of his show Alien Fun Capsule and as part of the programme I had brought in a sculpture I had made of his head. It looked just like him, if his head was a bag of old cod. Harry told me that anyone could submit to the summer exhibition, that my work could be on display in the Royal Academy and that I should definitely go for it. At first I thought he was joking – he’s a man who’s hard to take seriously – but in this regard he has never been more serious in his life. My submission was deadly serious, too. If that is not clear then know that I listed CHRIS’s sale price as £10.5m. This came as quite the surprise to the Academy as I received an email from a perplexed assistant: “We just wanted to check this was correct… and could you kindly advise on the insurance value of the work?” I’m not sure why she was baffled. CHRIS is an out-and-out bargain when you consider the record-breaking £108m pre-sale price of the Modigliani going up for auction later this month. And it’s a pittance next to the $450m (£325m) paid for Leonardo da Vinci’s Salvator Mundi in 2017. I fired off a curt reply: “Gosh! Did I put £10,500,000?! It’s meant to be £12,500,000! Brexit! I expect the insurance value is £4.99 or the equivalent in Argos vouchers.” I like to imagine the moment when CHRIS is sold. Overnight I will become a multimillionaire. I beam at the idea of me at the wheel of a luxury yacht, surrounded by models and moguls, sipping cool Gavi di Gavi as we meander down the French Riviera. One of the guests approaches, some twink underwear model called Rocco, and asks: “Joe, how did you amass this fortune? The stock market? An invaluable invention?” I softly grasp the back of Rocco’s neck with my palm and give him a thin smile: “Oh, Rocco, my sweet child. I am rich from none of these things. I am rich because I am one of the greatest artists who has ever lived.” In truth, I have absolutely no idea how to value my work. I didn’t think I should be paid £75k for this article, but the Guardian insisted. But CHRIS is definitely worth something – why shouldn’t he go for £12.5m if someone wants to pay it? If I had the money I’d happily pay £12.5m for any of the etchings or paintings Grace has sent me over the years. Sure, I’ve seen more human-looking sculptures come out of the back of my cat, but so what? I’d rather convince a billionaire to invest in art than in arms. CHRIS might not make it through the next round of judging, or worse, not sell. I’ve not really entertained the idea because it’s too abstract and implausible. To my mind he is the finest sculpture since the Pietà. And that’s all that matters. Trust. I trust he is brilliant and I trust he will sell. There’s no plan B. See you on the Riviera, hun.
4||Interior designer Abigail Ahern’s garden style: fireplaces and chandeliersWhen it comes to kitting out homes, designer Abigail Ahern knows what she’s doing. She has a knack for anticipating trends – most recently restoring the credibility of faux plants. Her own home, a Victorian terrace in London (“the area’s gone from murder mile to hipsterville in the 17 years we’ve been here”), is four floors of bohemian glam. But for many years the small rear garden was an afterthought, despite a double-height glass box extension looking out on to it. That changed four years ago when Ahern and her husband, Graham Scott, snapped up a wooden cabin on eBay. “The cabin pulled the eye down the garden and everything looked so bleak, just a long rectangle of grass and gravel with bamboo planted down the sides,” she says. Ahern decided to apply her well-honed interior design instincts to the garden and the transformation began. Four years on and there are jaw-dropping changes, not only to what is now a lush, riotous, sun-dappled jungle, full of feathery ferns and gently swaying bamboo, but to Ahern herself. A self-confessed workaholic, she and Scott both work from home, so the garden has become her escape. “It’s my way of decompressing – to come out here and think of other things, or not think at all, just weed and water. It’s incredibly restorative.” Here’s how Ahern put her interiors knowhow to work in the garden: Scale Placing outsize pieces, such as tables and chandeliers, smack in the middle of a room is a trademark of Ahern’s style. “It stops you noticing a smaller space and adds a bit of grandeur,” she says. So she decided to disrupt the garden’s dull linear layout by planting trees in the middle of the space rather than in orderly ranks around the edges. She started with an olive and, over time, added Japanese maple, some eucalyptus, a quince and an apple tree. The resultant jungle belies the plot’s size and Ahern relishes its height. “I work on the first floor of my house, so I wanted a garden I could look into, not down on,” she says. Structure Ahern claims there’s no structure to this garden, but she’s selling herself short. To navigate the space, she’s created paths using millboard – a synthetic wood often seen in high-end beach resorts. “It doesn’t deteriorate like timber would in all this damp shade,” she says. The shade itself is a conscious choice – Ahern has trained rampant climbers such as Russian vine over wires to give her privacy and create a cool retreat on hot days. Tucked around the garden are numerous seating areas. “Whether indoors or out, the trick is to design a space that you can’t take in all at once but have to explore; it’s so much more intriguing.” Colour and texture Rein in the colour palette, says Ahern. “If you stick to a few colours, any space will look cohesive.” She has opted for shades of green, peppered with white, such as a starry-flowered evergreen jasmine (Trachelospermum jasminoides), and yellow, such as the January-brightening pompoms of mimosa. These plants, like many others, were chosen for their looks and scent. And as with her house, what Ahern’s garden lacks in colour it makes up for in texture. More interested in foliage than flowers, she creates textural contrast between neighbouring plants, with ferns next to grasses, next to cacti. “I use texture like I do herbs and spices in cooking, to add pizzazz.” Year-round appeal Lush evergreen planting, lots of fire bowls and a brick fireplace that echoes its indoor counterpart, have given this garden year-round allure. There’s a concrete outdoor kitchen by WWOO, with a Big Green Egg barbecue and fire basket where Ahern makes stews and braises in a Dutch oven cooking pot. She even cooked Christmas lunch here, while wrapped in a blanket. “Apart from the delicious flavours of cooking over a fire, cooking outside feels exciting,” she says. “As soon as there’s a glimmer of warmth we eat every meal here, too.” Furniture and lighting Ahern has never found garden furniture that inspired her, so she looks for indoor pieces that will stand up to the rigours of outdoor life – furniture made from marble, ceramic or wood (which she treats to an annual coat of yacht varnish). It’s the same with lighting, which she has rewired for outdoor use. The garden is peppered with tree uplighters and strings of festoon lights, lamps and chandeliers for a festival-at-home atmosphere. • Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).
4||New town, no friends? Time for a bit of speed mating...Olivia has no friends. Or at least she has no friends in Sheffield, where she moved nine months ago. She had spent the previous decade teaching in Cambridge but last July she and her husband moved north. And while Sheffield has provided a great job and an affordable home, one thing the notoriously friendly city has not provided is mates. “No one talks about the process of making friends at our age,” she says. Olivia has tried. She bonded with someone in her Zumba class, but weeks later the woman got a job in another city. Her job has not helped. “There aren’t a lot of people in my stage of life at work, and anyway, as a teacher you spend the whole day in a classroom full of teenagers.” And so Olivia is taking a proactive step – she is going speed mating. Billed as “Tinder for friends, but in real life” the initiative is the brainchild of Megan Griffith, co-founder of the arts collective Girl Gang. The Sheffield event is held at the Leadmill nightclub. About 40 people turn up, almost all of them women (men are welcome, says Griffith, but need to know they will be in the minority). They range in age from early 20s to mid 40s. On arrival everyone is given a sheet with spaces for names, email addresses and phone numbers. Olivia’s original goal for the evening was to get one person’s number. “But then I thought, maybe that’s unrealistic so I’ve lowered my expectations. I’ve just got to see it as having a fun evening, and even if it goes badly, at least it’ll make a good story in the staff room.” The “Speed Mate-ing” event begins with “person bingo”, then people pair up and ask quick-fire questions for five minutes. Next they pair up with someone else to ask “would you rather?” questions, and a third person for “snog, marry avoid”. Kerry Chase and Aimée White are paired up and quickly move on from talking about the suggested questions to chatting about White’s time living in Serbia. A newcomer to Sheffield, White bemoans how tricky it is to make friends as an adult. “It’s not like when you’re a kid,” she says. “You can’t just say: ‘Let’s go play’. It’s like: ‘I’m not being creepy, but I just want a friend.’ Yeah, that’s creepy.” For several hours people chat, debate current affairs in small groups, make outfits out of newspaper and participate in various “organised fun” activities, all the time sussing each other out as potential friend material. After the first event in Manchester in October 2016, Girl Gang has run a dozen speed mating nights across Manchester, Leeds and Sheffield, and has had requests to start them up everywhere from York to Leamington Spa. However, they often sell more tickets than they have guests. Griffith says: “They’ve obviously booked a ticket thinking ‘I would really benefit from this event’, but then when it comes down to it, they can’t quite make themselves go.” Still, she thinks the event’s appeal comes from the fact that admitting to having no friends is taboo, so activities do not exist to help people build friendships. “I think romantic relationships get given a lot of airtime in society and friendship less so,” says Griffiths. “There are structures in place to meet somebody [romantically] ... which don’t seem to exist so much for friends.” A 2013 analysis of 277 peer-reviewed studies on social relationships found that the size of people’s friendship networks increased until young adulthood and then decreased steadily from that point, suggesting that making friends becomes, if not more difficult, then at least less common. This could be for many reasons, such as family, jobs and time, according to Rachel Boyd of the mental health charity Mind. “Friendship groups can become more established, so it can feel even harder to meet new people if they already have their own groups of friends.” Moving home can represents a particular challenge. “Certainly it can be really difficult if you’re in unfamiliar territory to know how to meet people,” Boyd says. The Jo Cox commission on loneliness found that 9 million Britons always or often feel lonely, largely due to the weakening of traditional community spaces, such as churches, trade unions, pubs and workplaces. “In the last few decades, loneliness has escalated from personal misfortune into a social epidemic,” the Labour MP and commission chair, Rachel Reeves, said in a speech in December. “More and more of us live alone. We work at home more. We spend a greater part of our day alone than we did 10 years ago. It sometimes feels like our best friend is the smartphone.” However, technology, while often being blamed for social disconnection and isolation, may also form part of the solution. Bumble, the dating app known for not allowing men to contact women first, launched Bumble BFF in 2015, allowing people to find potential friends, after users said they wanted to use the origninal app for that purpose. “Within six months [of launching Bumble], women in relationships or even people who had met someone on Bumble came to us and said: ‘I am moving across state or going to university and I don’t know anyone in that city. I don’t know anyone in that area ... you guys should think about launching something,’” says Louise Troen, international brand director for Bumble. But using an app or going to an event like speed mating to find friends is not without its stigma. Olivia is a pseudonym because she knows that if she used her real name and her students read this article “basically they would take the mick out of me”. When she told people she was going to a speed mating event, reactions were mixed. “I made a real effort to be vulnerable, so I told a few people I was doing this. Some people thought it was a bit weird, some people thought it was a great idea, others thought it was sad that I didn’t have friends, but then they offered to be friends with me,” she says, laughing. After the event, Olivia says she is exhausted: “I didn’t expect it to be so full-on.” “I felt like there were two groups – people who had gone with someone and were maybe approaching it as a fun chance to meet people, and people who I thought were in a similar position to me. “It’s also just reassuring to know I’m not the only person to feel like this. It’s not sad and it’s not pathetic, being 29 and not having friends in a new city.” Olivia has exceeded her goal for the evening, collecting three people’s numbers. The next day, she says she has been exchanging banter-filled texts and organised to go for a drink with one woman she met. A week later, she has had an offer to go to a comedy gig with a group, and a drink with someone else. “I’d say it’s absolutely been a success,” she says. “The other thing I’ve found is I’m more confident approaching people and suggesting meeting up. I think it’s given me a bit of a boost.”
25||Israel has its first Grand Tour – but will it get people on their bikes?While some wealthy benefactors to Israel choose to plant forests, build scenic promenades or put their names on hospitals, Sylvan Adams loves cycling so much he seed-funded some cycleways to help transform Tel Aviv into the “Amsterdam of the Middle East”. The Canadian real-estate billionaire also supplied cash to build a new velodrome – the first in the Middle East – and created a professional Israeli cycling team. He also stumped up some of the £9m fee for staging the first three stages of the 101st Giro d’Italia in Israel, which kicked off yesterday. But will bringing a Grand Tour to Israel get people on bikes? “It’s just one of the ways to increase cycling awareness in Israel,” said the 59-year-old Adams, who was once one of the top masters road and track cyclists in the world, and emigrated from Canada to Israel two years ago. Infrastructure will also be key, he agrees. He has been working through the Jewish National Fund to expand Tel Aviv’s bike lanes. The Sylvan Adams Cycling Network is not as dense as a typical Dutch network, but Rome wasn’t built in a day, said Adams. “Tel Aviv has historically been a car-centred city, but it suffers from traffic congestion and there’s nowhere to park, just like many other large cities. Cycling is one of the solutions. In the 1950’s, Amsterdam was a car-centred city, until civic officials decided to invest heavily in cycling infrastructure and create a bicycle friendly road network. We plan to do the same in Israel’s metropolis of Tel Aviv.” He added: “Petach Tikva is just eight kilometres from the heart of Tel Aviv yet it can sometimes take over an hour to drive that distance. It takes 20 to 30 minutes to cycle it,” he said. Ron Huldai, Tel Aviv’s mayor since 1998, is on side with the plans, said Adams. Tel Aviv may be slowly becoming a cycling Mecca – of sorts – but what about Jerusalem? Not so much. Motor traffic is chronically bad, and there are precious few cycleways. Those that exist are recreational rather than being placed beside the congested main roads. However, there are plenty of cheap Chinese e-bikes dotted around, with Palestinians just as likely to ride them as Ultra Orthodox Jews. This amount of cycle use is by no means huge, but it’s a sea change from when I was last in Israel. I lived here in the mid-1980s, having cycled from the UK, planning to stay a week but ending up staying for a year. For six months I lived with Chassidic Jews in the Old City (I’m not Jewish) and for another six I lived in the new city with an Israeli mathematician and his girlfriend. I met Gil Bor on the Mount of Olives and we became instant friends, bonding over bikes. We both did double-takes – meeting another cyclist in Jerusalem at that time was unusual enough for us to jam on brakes to talk. Gil was on his touring bike when we met but, when I went home with him that night, I discovered he had a mountain bike, too. I had never seen one in the flesh. He had imported the first in Israel (it was too big for me but I tried it anyway and promptly crashed it because I wasn’t used to powerful brakes). I have fond memories of cycle touring with Gil in the West Bank, visiting Arab villages and being plied with mint tea. A few years after the first intifida, it became harder to cycle around with such freedom. I next visited during the first Gulf War in 1991, when the first Scud missiles were starting to land and there were fears that Saddam Hussein had equipped them with chemical warheads. I had a war correspondent’s press pass and bumped into Israel’s then prime minister, the diminutive Yitzhak Shamir, but I was in the country to research the Berlitz Discover Guide to Israel. When the air-raid sirens went off I took to the streets on a hired bike, riding in perfect safety because folks had hurried to underground shelters, and there was no motor traffic whatsoever. Thirty-nine Scud missiles landed in Israel during the five-and-a-half weeks of the war. I figured none would hit me. Jerusalem was the perfect cycling city when there were no pesky cars about, and if the municipality truly wants to encourage cycling after the Giro ships off to Italy after its three days in Israel, then car use will have to be restrained. Adams agrees that if his dream of making Israel as bike friendly as the Netherlands is to come true there needs to be a major change in Israel’s cycling culture. “Cycling is already the fastest growing recreational sport in Israel, and bringing the Giro Big Start here and having the first velodrome in the Middle East are building blocks to greatly expand the sport. But we also have perfect weather for cycling commuting 12 months a year, and by creating the necessary infrastructure for safe riding, I am sure we can become the Amsterdam of the Middle East, which will be ecologically friendly, take cars off the road, save travel times, and promote healthy physical activity.”
23||Weekend reading: Puppet boy, palms and fake natureAfter Windrush, how can black Tories stand by their party? Many Britons from minority ethnic backgrounds are natural conservatives, but they will struggle to shake off the continued hypocrisy of this government ‘There’s a lot of fakery’: insiders on the dirty tricks behind wildlife photography After a photographer lost an award for allegedly using a taxidermy anteater, colleagues describe cases of glued insects and trained tigers The new rules for a successful meeting Amazon employees sit in silence – while Tesla boss Elon Musk advocates walking out if you aren’t adding value. But how can you stop wasting your life in pointless meetings? Here’s an expert guide Caster Semenya and the IAAF: if the science is wrong, the ruling is wrong The case isn’t just about sport, or sex, or gender, but ethics, politics, culture, race and science. Expert opinion is split. Which is why the arguments have been going back and forth for the best part of a decade Jordan Wolfson: ‘This is real abuse not a simulation’ Creepy and vengeful, Wolfson’s puppet boy is violently smashed to the floor at Tate Modern – then threatens to fight back. But is the controversial US artist just yanking our chain? Kew’s Temperate House reopens after revamp Five-year project involved moving 10,000 plants and replacing 15,000 panes of glass Art Shay: acclaimed photographer - in pictures Shay, who has died aged 96, photographed celebrities, politicians and ordinary Americans during a career that spanned 70 years. His work for publications including Time, Life and Sports Illustrated made him one of the most respected photojournalists of his generation The toxic legacy of Canada’s CIA brainwashing experiments: ‘They strip you of your soul’ In the 1950s and 60s, a Montreal hospital subjected psychiatric patients to electroshocks, drug-induced sleep and huge doses of LSD. Families are still grappling with the effects decades on Six of the best one-pot meals Cut down on the washing up with these all-in-one dishes, including pork ribs with dumplings, chard gratin and Korean beef stew
7||Can I cook like ... Casanova?Giacomo Casanova’s favourite food was macaroni cheese. This came as something of a relief to me, because I’ve been on something of a losing streak in the kitchen recently and, no matter what, I know I can cook macaroni cheese. The anglicised version involves brief grilling, but in honour of Casanova I forego the grilling and allow the cheese to melt in the pasta. I use Grana Padano because, like Casanova, it hails from Venice. It is also on offer at my local supermarket. But although macaroni cheese was Casanova’s favourite meal, and he loved food – by my count, mealtimes feature more frequently than women in his memoirs – it didn’t feature in his favourite mealtime: breakfast. I suppose this is par for the course: breakfast is the most important meal of the day, even more so when you are shagging your way through 18th-century Europe. He generally started the day with freshly baked bread. This is a hell of a lot is easier if you have domestic servants, but I settle for baking mine the night before. Less easy are his preferred accompaniment: oysters. Casanova ate oysters like they were going out of fashion, slurping them down with every single meal. He is essentially responsible for the urban myth that they are an aphrodisiac. I know very little about oysters, but I do know two things: that you aren’t supposed to eat them some of the time, and that this relates to whether or not there is an “r” in the month. What I cannot remember is whether to eat them when there is an “r” in the month, or when there isn’t. Readers with working calendars and modern dictionaries will know there is no “r” in May, and I reason that, as I have to eat the damned things anyway, I shouldn’t worry too much about whether this is a good or a bad thing. I have never eaten oysters before – somehow, whenever they have appeared on a menu, it has always been alongside other things I would rather eat – and once I put aside my anxiety about whether or not this is a safe month to eat them, I find them slimy, salty, but curiously moreish. I can’t say they offset the macaroni cheese particularly well, though.
26||The best body washes for sensitive skinIt’s surprising how many people think they’re sensitive to water. They describe extreme post-shower redness, blotchiness, soreness and/or itching – a highly inconvenient reaction to an unavoidable daily ritual. Aquagenic urticaria (water allergy or sensitivity) is a miserable business, but in reality not all that common. In my experience, those who believe water is causing problems are more likely to be reacting to body washes containing sodium laureth/lauryl sulphate (SLS), a surfactant processed chemically from coconut or palm oil and used widely to make toiletries and cleaning products foam and lather. Although most people tolerate SLS, it has a PR problem. Many believe it’s carcinogenic (there’s no solid evidence for this), harmful to the environment (it can be toxic to marine life) and a skin irritant (it’s not; reactions are usually mild). But SLS is drying. When skin becomes very dry, it itches, feels tight and uncomfortable, and sometimes reddens. In such circumstances, an SLS-free body wash is a wise choice, and a must if you suffer from eczema, psoriasis, dermatitis or ichthyosis. I was born with the latter (hence my obsession with skin) and have switched almost exclusively to Soaper Duper Body Washes (£6 for a whopping 500ml, packed in 100% recycled plastic). There are six natural, SLS-free fragrances, the shea and coconut being especially good for dry skin. For the fragrance-intolerant, I recommend Sukin’s wonderful Dermasukin Daily Gentle Soap Free Wash (£8.98, 250ml), which contains aloe, camomile and nothing nasty. It lathers to leave skin feeling properly clean (thanks to sodium lauroyl sarcosinate, an eco-friendly and gentle surfactant) and increases post-shower comfort. Baby washes are often a safe bet for the fragrance-averse, too. Childs Farm makes a mild, simple, unfragranced wash for £4 (250ml) that cleans without irritation. You could use soap, the product SLS was designed to replace. Dr Bronner’s Pure Castille Liquid Soap (£7.69, 237ml), in 100% recycled packaging, comes in natural fragrances or unscented, and can be used safely as shampoo, hand-wash, shower gel, household cleanser and detergent for hand-washing. Every product mentioned above is also cruelty free.
16||Local elections: neither Corbyn nor May able to break poll deadlockJeremy Corbyn and Theresa May both sought to put a brave face on local council results that suggested neither can break the electoral deadlock that delivered a hung parliament last June. For Labour, setbacks in the Midlands and a failure to live up to sky-high expectations in the capital, where it had set its sights on Wandsworth and Westminster, took the shine off an unexpected victory in Plymouth. Corbyn told Labour supporters the results showed his party was “ready for a general election whenever it comes” and insisted: “There’s much more to come and it’s going to get even better.” He added: “Obviously, I am disappointed at any places where we lost a bit of ground, but if you look at the overall picture, Labour gained a lot of seats across the whole country; we gained a lot of votes in places we never had those votes before.” The Conservatives took control of councils in Basildon and Peterborough, but lost Trafford, in Greater Manchester, and the Mole Valley. On Friday night Tower Hamlets became the last council to declare, with Labour the winner. The party has been left with 74 councils, the same number as before the election. The Conservatives control 46 – down two. The parties hold 2,308 and 1,230 seats respectively. The Liberal Democrats now control nine councils, up four, with 536 seats – a gain of 77. The Greens increased their share by eight seats to 39, while Ukip were the big losers, dropping 57 seats to hold just three. The far-right BNP were wiped out altogether. The BBC’s projected national share of the vote, which uses the results in local elections to estimate the parties’ standing across the country, put Labour and the Conservatives neck-and-neck on 35% apiece. The prime minister toured areas where the Conservatives made gains – or seen off Labour’s advance. Greeted by cheering supporters in Wandsworth, she said: “Labour thought they could take control. This was one of their top targets and they threw everything at it, but they failed. “We won’t take anything for granted. We will continue to work hard for local people and we will build on this success for the future.” May later travelled to Dudley, another Labour target held by the Tories, who were boosted by the collapse of support for Ukip. “We’ve seen great results around the country, not just here in the West Midlands, but in London. We’ve taken Basildon and Peterborough and we’ve shown what hard work by Conservative councillors can do in delivering for people,” she said. Justine Greening, the former education secretary, said the results revealed that Labour had reached “peak Corbyn” since last summer’s general election. In spite of May’s claim that she wanted to “bring our country back together”, the results underlined sharp divisions between England’s towns and cities and between leave and remain-voting areas. Prof John Curtice, the elections expert, pointed out that the Conservative party appeared to have made gains predominantly in leave areas, as it profited from the collapse of Ukip. “The electorate that it now has is disproportionately a leave electorate,” he said. The Lib Dems also benefited from a Brexit backlash, with huge wins in two south-west London councils, Kingston and Richmond, both areas with a heavily pro-remain vote. The party picked up dozens of council seats elsewhere, from Hull to South Cambridgeshire, where they took control of the council. Sir Vince Cable, the party leader, said the results showed “a return to three-party politics.” Lisa Nandy, the MP for Wigan, warned that losing ground in Bolton, Dudley and her own seat of Wigan underlined the fact that Labour’s message was failing to appeal to voters in towns where years of job losses had eroded the sense of community. “People have looked to politics for some time to solve this and seen us obsessed with a city-centric model, which is reliant on the benefits trickling down,” she said. “Unless Labour gets to grips with that, the next election is far from secure, with Labour piling up the votes in cities, and the Tories having a near-monopoly on the countryside. Whoever gets this town’s argument will win the next general election and the one after that.” In London, Labour performed more strongly in boroughs where it already had a healthy lead over the Conservatives when the seats were last contested, in 2014. Judged by the numbers of seats, Labour put in its best performance ever in a series of outer London boroughs, including Ealing, Croydon, Enfield and Waltham Forest. But the biggest blow for the party came in Barnet, its main target in the capital, where it needed to gain just one seat to take control. Instead, the north London council moved into overall Conservative control, amid Labour recriminations about antisemitism. Andy Burnham, Manchester’s metropolitan mayor, said voters had raised the issue of antisemitism with him on the doorstep. “It is clear that antisemitism was a very real issue in this campaign, not everywhere, but in areas where particularly there is a large Jewish community,” he said. “That is true here in Greater Manchester. If you look at the Kersal ward in Salford, I was out there myself and it was a pretty sobering experience, to be honest, because the hurt and the anger is painfully real in those places. “So what I would say back to Ken Livingstone and others who have made this argument that it’s all a smear designed to just undermine Jeremy Corbyn, let’s hope that these elections draw a very firm line under these arguments and basically knock it out, because the truth of the matter is there is a very real sense of rawness in the Jewish community.” Grassroots campaign group Momentum said its thousands of activists had helped to boost Labour’s showing in a series of key areas, including Trafford, where the Conservatives lost control, and Wandsworth. “We’re very pleased to see healthy gains in areas where Momentum campaigned hardest,” said Laura Parker, Momentum’s national coordinator. “This shows just how important it is to have an engaged, enthusiastic movement - people who will get out into the community and spread Labour’s message.” While early predictions that Labour could take Wandsworth proved over-optimistic, Labour sources pointed out that a few hundred votes in several swing wards could have clinched it. Corbyn said his party had come “within a whisker” of winning.
27||Secret Teacher: students need PSHE guidance but I'm not equipped to give itIn my past role as a form tutor, PSHE (personal, social, health and economic) teaching was not my passion. It filled me with dread – not because I didn’t see the value of it (I did) but because I didn’t have a clue. I’m an English graduate and an English teacher. I didn’t sign up for anything else. With the pressures to achieve high grades, mark extensively according to school policy and stay on top of lesson planning, PSHE was just an added stress. No one told me how to teach PSHE. I was just the form teacher to that group of students. That seemed wrong: a subject fundamental in the development of pupils’ social and emotional skills is randomly allocated a weekly spot in the timetable and a teacher. But it’s hardly surprising that this was, and remains, the UK’s approach to PSHE. Although in guidance for PSHE teaching, the government acknowledges its importance and necessity in pupils’ education, it is a non-statutory subject. Instead, the guidance says, teachers “are best placed to understand the needs of their students and do not need additional central prescription”. The lack of a standardised approach is a cop-out and emphasises the government’s lack of consideration for PSHE as a subject – otherwise it would provide a fixed framework and a detailed curriculum. And what makes me, an English teacher, or Steve down in Science “best placed” to understand our students’ PSHE needs? I could run through some generic worksheets outlining the birds and the bees, but that is not what our students need. They need proper time spent on the serious issues affecting them every day, taught by people equipped with the right knowledge and skills. My school wouldn’t dream of sending me out on the field to teach year 9 hockey; why does the same principle not apply to PSHE? Teenage students are in relationships, having adult experiences and are arguably more advanced than we were at their age. To address this, we need to adapt our approach. Despite more topics now being covered in PSHE – such as LGBT awareness – many other issues are skirted around. Consent, pornography and sexting are topics that should be covered in depth to give students the skills to keep themselves safe. According to the police, sexting cases involving children (some as young as 10) have increased exponentially in the past two years, with approximately 17 offences recorded every day in 2016-17. Most children won’t know that sharing and possessing sexual images of minors is illegal. It’s this lack of effective sex and relationship education that I fear causes the proliferation of the inappropriate sexual comments I often hear in the classroom (and that are occasionally directed at staff). And where is mental health in the guidance? At school, I’ve had a student quite candidly (and bravely) open up to me about her suicidal thoughts. Another sought permission to work independently in the library because of the panic attacks brought on by being in the classroom with others. I’ve had students tell me they’ve removed themselves from social media to escape the pressures to look, act and live a certain way. These are just a handful of cases in recent months. There are many, many more. In the competitive climate in which schools operate, many do not invest the time or money to design a PSHE curriculum, even though the government has empowered them to do so. Students are most likely to be withdrawn from PSHE for extra support in other subjects. Thankfully there are independent groups and charities that offer workshops to schools on how to tackle issues such as body image, self-esteem, anxiety and depression. But not all schools want or can afford them. All of these are real issues that affect young people now and will impact on their future – there shouldn’t be unequal access to such education. If there was a PGCE in PSHE, I’d enrol today. But there isn’t. The closest that exists is citizenship. There should be training for PSHE – not only to educate teachers, but to equip them with the skills to present this information professionally, non-judgmentally and confidently. We owe it to the students. Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach, like us on Facebook, and join the Guardian Teacher Network the latest articles direct to your inbox Looking for a teaching job? Or perhaps you need to recruit school staff? Take a look at Guardian Jobs, the education specialist
19||Venus as a Bear by Vahni Capildeo review – direct, intimate and funnyA good place to find bears in Roman Britain would have been north of the Antonine Wall, the subject of a poem in Vahni Capildeo’s Venus as a Bear. “I want you like I want a wall / I want you in bits”, we read in “Romano-Celtic Contact in the Antonine Display, Hunterian Museum, Glasgow”, though the “bits” here refer to archaeological remains rather than the aftermath of a human-ursine encounter. As the author of the outstanding Measures of Expatriation, winner of the 2016 Forward prize, Capildeo has already given evidence of her border-crossing imagination, and in Venus as a Bear she expands her cross-cultural investigations into the natural world. Björk fans will catch the allusion in the title to “Venus as a Boy’” and in “Björk/Birch Tree” Capildeo celebrates creaturely transformations: “Lady into swan, come down; swan into sea, / set down; fire from the sea, set out; reach; launch.” As a genre, the bestiary has appealed to poets from Guillaume Apollinaire to DH Lawrence to Donika Kelly, with the interest lying as much in its classificatory challenge as in the animals themselves. “What is the term / for the gathering of one falcon?”, asks “Day, with Hawk”, while “The Last Night, a Nightingale” worries that our interest in them may not be such good news for the animals (“Whoever drew you also caged you”). “Another armored animal,” exclaimed that most famous laureate of the beasts, Marianne Moore, in “The Pangolin”. Moore’s zoomorphic fantasias are frequently couched in imagery of armour and elusiveness, and the variable forms and torsive syntax of Capildeo’s work perform comparable acts of self-estrangement. Like many poems here, “Brant Geese” tugs language in the direction of the inhuman, and relishes the onomatopoeic results: “open a bubble of babble / swagger and swallow a vowel / turd it turn it shine it slime it”. Many poets of the natural world have turned away from Romantic anthropomorphism, but the idea of an art truly scoured clean of our human projections is no less tricky. Yeats was once upbraided by a reviewer for his description of a dancing peahen. Peahens do not dance but, with a fine disregard for the facts, Yeats announced: “As to the poultry yards, with them I have no concern.” Capildeo describes a stone curlew engaged in “nietzschean dancing”, which may have its share of Yeatsian licence, while in “Catifesto” she embraces full-on identification, announcing: “I am my own cat.” For a poet who has written so well on migration and displacement, Capildeo anchors her imagination in some of the earliest poetry of the British archipelago (poetry that is itself dominated by migration and displacement), as she reminds us in “Seastairway”, with its epigraph from the Anglo-Saxon poem “The Seafarer”, and “After Hávamál”, a translation from Old Norse. “Seastairway” appeared in a recent centenary anthology for WS Graham. As well as sharing the Scottish poet’s frequently maritime subject matter, it captures perfectly the specific gravity of his philosophical meditations on language and belonging. Another translation, “After Catullus 5”, reminds us of Capildeo’s playfully erotic side (“the blonde from Gallia / who lays her head / low on my belly / while she tends my lady-garden”), and a series of homages to Pierre de Ronsard show a rare sensitivity to the French poet’s delicate forms. As a translator, Capildeo espouses an aesthetic of impurity, of versioning rather than any more notionally strict fidelity, and in “Bullshit” she eulogises the impure in the form of actual bullshit, as a large bull sprays manure all over a diplomatic compound (“A great bull is shitting on my street. Let him have his quiet enjoyment”). Elsewhere, a series on plant life strays into prose poetry in a manner reminiscent of the mystic materialism of Francis Ponge, matching the French poet in its unerring, granular eye for detail. Intricately detailed landscape writing is a strength too, as in the beautiful memoir of “Trinidad Sugar” and a sequence set on the Galway island of Inishbofin, where the theme of peeling off and swapping skins is once more in the air: sea for a bit lovingly lifting it off this felted skin this roof needing resurfaced A bald enumeration of Capildeo’s influences, subjects, travel destinations and poetic forms might give an impression of dizzying multifariousness. Other noticeable affinities, for instance, are to Helen Macdonald (Macdonald’s 2001 poetry collection Shaler’s Fish) and, of all people, Captain Beefheart. But the essential remains the same throughout. Capildeo, it is only fair to acknowledge, is a demanding writer, someone who stretches the conventions of the lyric poem in unprecedented ways; but Venus as a Bear demands nothing from its readers that it does not also repay generously. She is, among much else, a direct and sensual poet, warmly intimate and very funny. She has also been a copiously productive poet; Venus as a Bear is her eighth collection. Writers are sometimes praised for being “representative”, to align them with the spirit of the age, but Capildeo is engaged in remaking poetic style rather than accommodating herself to it. These hugely intelligent and impressive poems, to borrow a phrase of their own, are “flame powered by roses”. Venus as a Bear by Ahni Capildeo (Carcanet Press Ltd, £9.99). To order a copy for £8.49, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&amp;p of £1.99.
9||What killed history's most famous people? Medical sleuths gather to investigateWhether it is a mysterious fever or sudden incapacitation – even today, diagnosing quite what has carried someone off can leave doctors scratching their heads. But every year a group of academics gather to embrace an even tougher challenge: casting a verdict on how and why some of the most famous names in history died. From Florence Nightingale to Charles Darwin, and from Lenin to Cromwell, academics have pored over the historical accounts to scrutinise treatments and in some cases offer up a cause of death. Now experts have turned the spotlight on the 12th century sultan and nemesis of the crusaders, Saladin, to reveal the cause of the kurdish military hero’s demise at the age of 56 in 1193 AD. “It’s difficult to work it out because there is essentially no information – there are no tests and the historical accounts are a little questionable, and there isn’t much anyhow,” said Dr Stephen Gluckman, professor of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, noting there are only a few fairly reliable details – including the two week duration of Saladin’s illness. The case is the latest to be raised at the annual meeting of the Historical Clinicopathological Conference in the US. “Nobody else does anything like it, as far as I know. It’s unique,” said conference director Dr Philip Mackowiak of the University of Maryland, adding that the conference brings together academics from across medicine and the arts. The goal, he says, is to teach the history of medicine and educate trainees on principles of diagnosis. “And number three is entertainment,” he said. While historical accounts describe how Saladin’s final illness involved sweating, attacks of “bilious fevers” and headaches, quite what the cause of the sickness was has long been a matter of debate, with suggestions including tuberculosis meningitis. Now Gluckman, who was asked to examine the case, says he’s weighed the evidence, and the concluded the culprit was the bacterial infection, typhoid. “It is really based on what the common diseases were at that time, and of those which were fatal, and of those, which were fatal in a time period of around two weeks,” said Gluckman, adding typhus is another possibility. But the diagnosis is not without doubt. Mackowiak admits that there is no evidence Saladin had abdominal pains – a common symptom of typhoid – but said the historical record is written by non-medical people, and often after the event. Dr Tom Asbridge, a medieval historian from Queen Mary University of London, who will give a lecture at the conference on Saladin’s successes at the battle of Hattin and re-capturing Jerusalem, said the sultan’s death might have scuppered plans for a pivotal campaign. “If you see it from the perspective of the muslim world, [Saladin’s] death is quite tragic because he fought long and hard and in a very committed manner through what we call the third crusade… and that’s the crusade that is led by none other than the new king of England, Richard the Lionheart,” he said. Among previous figures to have their deaths scrutinised at the conference is Florence Nightingale who spent decades in poor health before her death at the age of 90. While there have been rumours the mysterious malady was syphilis, others have categorically ruled it out. “There is absolutely no justification for that diagnosis, her symptoms were not in any way consistent with syphilis,” said Mackowiak. “Her severe disorder cleared up on its own after for 30 years wreaking havoc physically and psychologically – and as far as I can tell she never had a sexual relationship with anyone.” Mackowiak says it is likely Nightingale had four conditions: bipolar disorder, the bacterial infection brucellosis – then known as Crimean fever – as well as post traumatic stress disorder, and, later on, dementia. Abraham Lincoln’s death from a bullet fired by the actor John Wilkes Booth has also been examined. “The question was if Lincoln had been shot [in 2007], how would he have been treated by our current shock trauma units...and what would the likely outcome have been,” said Mackowiak, noting that the conclusion was that Lincoln would have survived and, possibly been well enough to continue as president. But ultimately, says Mackowiak, the conference is not about offering a conclusive diagnosis. “I couldn’t say that any of the cases that we have discussed, and this is the 25th, are closed, because we don’t have any definitive test results for obvious reasons,” he said.
6||Should I get rid of my Isa and buy Lloyds Bank shares instead?Every week a Guardian Money reader submits a question, and it’s up to you to help him or her out – a selection of the best answers will appear in next Saturday’s paper. This week’s question: My cash Isa at Lloyds Bank pays me a miserable 0.35% interest. But if I buy shares in Lloyds Bank, they are paying dividends worth 4.7% a year. Should I get rid of my Isa and buy the shares instead? As far as I can see, the bank is safe and the dividend is safe, so it must be a no-brainer? Do you have a problem readers could solve? Email your suggestions tomoney@theguardian.com or write to us at Money, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU
4||Is this bike really theft-proof?It’s an £800 “bicycle with a brain” that locks itself as soon as its owner steps away and alerts them if a thief tries to tamper with it, while an in-built tracker tells a roving team of “bike hunters” how to retrieve it if it is nicked. Is the Van Moof “smart bike” the answer to cycle thefts – or will determined thieves find a way around it? More than 250,000 bikes have been stolen in the UK in the past three years – one every six minutes – according to new figures from insurer Direct Line. Theft levels now are about 17% higher than three years ago, it said, with east London the centre of bike crime. Van Moof joins a string of bike and lock manufacturers claiming to have solved the plague of bike theft. Yerka is the front runner, with an ingenious design that integrates the bike lock into the frame, so if a thief breaks the lock the bike is ruined. Meanwhile, a US firm has developed a £90 lock that emits a smelly liquid when it is being cut, which makes thieves vomit. It’s called the SkunkLock. The new Van Moof smart bike, retailing at £768, comes with a rear-wheel ring lock. When the rider hops off their bike at the end of a journey, the theft-defence system, neatly hidden in the bike’s crossbar, is automatically enabled. If a thief tries to ride off on the bike, the ring lock kicks in, “all the vital systems are disabled” and an alarm goes off, progressively getting louder. The owner is notified by phone that the bike is on the move, while Van Moof’s bike hunters promise to find it within two weeks – or give you a new bike for free. “If it goes on the move, the lock-down mode kicks in, turning on the theft defence tracking and alerting our bike hunters,” says Karlijn Marchildon of Van Moof in Amsterdam, where bike theft is as common as it is in the UK. She claims their bike hunters tracked one cycle stolen in Paris as far as Casablanca, where they uncovered an industrial-level theft operation. The design of the bike, with the lights incorporated into the crossbar, is certainly eye-catching. As you approach it, Bluetooth technology recognises you as the owner, and it greets you with a wake-up sound, while disarming the alarm. When Guardian Money took its three-speed version for a test ride, it performed with all the ease and comfort most commuters would expect from a city-style hybrid bike. The drawback? At £768 it’s a fancy price by most standards. What’s more, the bike hunter feature only kicks in if you pay €100 (£88) a year or €240 for three years. Canny cyclists will spot that you would pay less for an insurance policy to replace it if stolen. And while the alarms and lock-down technology are impressive, there’s still nothing to stop a thief simply picking it up and throwing it in the back of a van. Most city dwellers pay no attention to car and house alarms, and won’t to bike alarms either. Van Moof acknowledges that the price will put many off, and has introduced a pay-as-you-go system with users putting down a deposit of £279, then paying £18 a month, which includes the bike hunter deal. Perhaps the biggest problem with the Van Moof bike is that it’s not theft-proof – rather, it is designed to make sure that if it is stolen you will get it back. For a bike that is possibly entirely theft-proof, you might want to consider the Yerka. The brainchild of a group of students in Chile, it works by turning the bike’s frame into a giant lock. The front tube of the bike’s frame splits in half, and the rider then places the bike around something secure, such as a street pole, before resealing it. The genius of the design is that if a thief wants to steal it, he has to cut through the bike itself – making it unrideable. Yerka was unveiled in 2015 but the first deliveries to Europe have only begun recently. The €649 (£572) bike does not have any official distributor in the UK yet, but in Hamburg, Germany, bike shop manager Razak Steinbrich of Fahrrad-Café St Pauli says sales are brisk, although some find the locking system takes time to get used to. “They are very fresh on to the market, but we’ve sold quite a few and the customers say they are wonderful to ride, bar a few small details,” he says. “On the locking system, people are 50-50. Some find it easier to manage than others.” Direct Line says there were 93,571 bicycle thefts in the UK last year and 257,000 over the past three years. The most common types targeted by thieves are mountain bikes, making up nearly half of all thefts in the past three years. How to insure your bike The cheapest way to insure a bike against theft and damage is to add it to your home contents policy. Aviva says adding a bike worth up to £500 to a policy should only cost around £10. “This will provide cover for theft – assuming it is locked securely to a solid object – anywhere in the world,” it says. The £10 fee will also cover bikes of the same value for a family of four, so it’s ideal for parents whose children are students at university. “The price does not increase whether individual or for family. This is underwritten, so prices can vary, but most people can expect to pay around £10,” Aviva said. The big drawback is the excess – the amount you have to pay as part of any claim. So if you have a £100 excess – the lowest level that Aviva allows – and your £250 bike is nicked, you’ll get a £150 payout. If you have a higher excess, such as £250, then it won’t even be worth claiming. What’s more, you’ll have to declare the theft when shopping around for cover the next year – and your premium may rise accordingly. Numerous insurance companies offer cycle-specific policies, at about £35 to £50 a year for a £500 bike. Excesses are lower, at about £25 to £75. Many will cover racing, personal accident and public liability, for a small extra premium. We asked a range of insurers to quote on a £500 Specialized bike, with a London postcode. • One Pro wanted £35.37 for a year’s cover, with a £50 excess. It also offers one-day insurance – aimed at borrowing very high value bikes – from £12.60 a day. • Endsleigh charged £48.47 for a year’s cover on a £401-£500 bike for a student, but wanted a lot of details during the online sign-up, including age, university, postcode, parent’s address etc, so this rate may vary a lot. It has a maximum excess of £50. • ETA Cycle Insurance claims to the be the most ethical and comprehensive insurer. It wanted £61.04 to insure our bike, dropping to £52.35 on a south coast postcode. The excess was £25. How to keep your bike safe Gleaming new bikes are a magnet to thieves – so rough yours up. Paint distinctive marks – and better still your postcode – on the frame with enamel paint, or scratch it in. Masking tape on the frame soon turns grey, and an older saddle will help. Replace quick-release wheel skewers with lockable versions. Register the frame with Bike Register. If police recover your stolen bike, you’ll get it back. Where you are going to leave it? Busy sites with lots of passing people and CCTV are best. Never, ever leave it overnight. Use the best lock you can – ideally it should cost 10%-20% of the bike’s cost. A scuffed-up bike with a good lock will usually last. Thieves are lazy and in most cases target cheap locks. If it does go, keep an eye out on eBay and Gumtree.
6||Pensions: is it right to charge 45-55% tax on incomes above £26,000?This is going to be a difficult column to write. I’m about to make a plea for tax changes on behalf of people with £1m-plus pensions. Why? Because our tax system has created perverse incentives that are forcing high earners such as doctors, dentists, lawyers and accountants to save less, invest unwisely and engage advisers to try to work around the rules, when simple reforms can achieve the same policy aim – of making sure that the well-off don’t milk the pension tax relief system. Let’s be clear that while £1m is a huge sum, and far above what most workers are saving into their pension, it doesn’t actually translate into a luxury pension income. Buy an income with £1m at retirement and you’ll receive an annuity (a guaranteed income) of about £25,000-£26,000 a year, according to figures from Retirement Advantage. That’s a very comfortable sum – considering you’ll get the state pension on top – but hardly puts you in the round-the-world-cruise league. Yet if your pension fund is worth more than £1,030,000 – the current level of what’s called the “lifetime allowance” – the government will tax everything above that amount at either 55% (if you take it as a lump sum) or 45% (if you take it as income and you’re a standard rate tax payer). The lifetime allowance was introduced to prevent the rich from gouging the pension tax relief system. High earners were shovelling vast amounts of their income into pension schemes, to take advantage of very generous tax reliefs. So in 2006 the government capped at £1.5m the total amount that could be held in a pension fund and still obtain tax relief. It was a reasonable thing to do. But it has since been slashed to £1.03m this tax year – and with interest rates falling to rock-bottom levels, it means that it has captured a lot more people than intended, and is making them do rather peculiar things. Advisers are telling people bumping up against the £1.03m limit, mostly in their late 50s or early 60s, to stop paying both their company and personal savings into a pension – or be liable for up to 55% tax. As a country, we’re saving far too little, yet individuals are being told to order their company to stop saving on their behalf. Now let’s assume you’re a canny investor, and your pension fund is performing well, and it soars past £1m. The government then collects up to 55% of the sums above that. So investors are being told to be conservative in where they put their money – for fear that it might grow too fast. This is a penalty for investing wisely. You can’t get around it by hopping off to Spain and taking your pension there. HMRC has closed all the loopholes – except one, that funnily enough benefits members of parliament. Most people have pension pots that grow in line with the stock market – and can be easily valued against the £1.03m limit. But members of final salary schemes, with big pensions, such as MPs and judges, are promised an income in retirement, rather than a pot of money. For the purposes of the lifetime allowance, their income is multiplied by 20 to see if it breaches the £1.03m level. If, like an MP, you are on for a £50,000-a-year pension, your fund is presumed to be £1m (20 x £50,000) and therefore below the 55% tax grab. So people in final salary schemes, who have enjoyed lavish funding of their pension, then enjoy a lavish tax treatment as well. In effect, they have a £2m lifetime allowance. So how do we make this equitable? We should scrap the lifetime allowance altogether and rely instead on the annual cap on contributions into a pension that qualify for tax relief. Currently it’s set at £40,000 a year. Arguably, that’s a little too generous in itself. But at least it’s clean and simple. You should just be allowed to save into your pension, subject to the annual cap, and whatever comes out the other side at retirement is your own business. More importantly, we need to spread the benefits of pension tax relief. Currently high earners get 40% relief, lower earners 20%. The poor, who need to save more, get much less tax relief than the well-off. This is self-evidently wrong; a blend of the two rates at 30% would be fairer – although there would have to be complex adjustments to make sure final salary scheme members pay their way. An annual allowance of £30,000 to £40,000, plus relief standardised at 30%, would encourage pension saving for all without being a giveaway to the rich.
4||What device might have a rack and snail mechanism? The Weekend quizThe questions 1 Which prisoner was buried in Paris in 1703 under the name Marchioly? 2 Which dog played himself in the 1966 film The Spy With A Cold Nose? 3 When does Google suggest, “Did you mean: nag a ram?” 4 In antiquity, what were Mons Calpe and Mons Abila? 5 What 1980s all-female entertainment was GLOW? 6 Which literary couple lived at Casa Guidi, Florence? 7 Which German football teams contest the Revierderby? 8 What device might have a rack and snail mechanism? What links: 9 Daniel; Lucy; Benny; Guy; Jeannie; Nikita? 10 St Bernadette; Lenin; Mao; Kim Il-sung and Kim Jong-il; Jeremy Bentham? 11 Marmota monax; February 2; Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania? 12 Maria Manuela of Portugal; Mary I of England; Elizabeth of Valois; Anna of Austria? 13 Babkin; parachute; palmar grasp; Galant; Landau; plantar? 14 Kerry Hill; Cheviot; Romney; Herdwick; Rough Fell; Swaledale? 15 ALICE; ATLAS; CMS; TOTEM; LHCb; LHCf; MoEDAL? The answers 1 The Man in the Iron Mask. 2 Pickles. 3 Searching for anagram. 4 The Pillars of Hercules. 5 Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling. 6 Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning. 7 Borussia Dortmund and Schalke 04. 8 A striking clock. 9 Names in Elton John hits. 10 Bodies on public display. 11 Groundhog Day: groundhog; date; setting for film. 12 Married Philip II of Spain. 13 Primitive reflexes in infants. 14 Native British sheep breeds. 15 Experiments at the Large Hadron Collider at Cern.
24||18 of the world’s best rail journeysUK London to Fort William Duration: 419 miles/13hr Price (single): From £45 The Caledonian Sleeper, one of Britain’s last sleeper services (the other is the Night Riviera to Penzance), is getting a £100m upgrade. The new trains will have double beds, en suites, Highland food and Arran toiletries. They’ll run first on the Lowland route from London to Edinburgh/Glasgow in October, then join the Highland route to Fort William next year. The Highland service, called the Deerstalker, is one of the best train journeys in Britain. After Glasgow, it goes past Loch Treig to the foot of Ben Nevis. From Fort William, the line continues to Mallaig, across the Glenfinnan viaduct – of Harry Potter fame – for ferries to Skye. • newtrains.sleeper.scot EUROPE Bilbao to Ferrol, Spain Duration: 267 miles/12½hr Price: From £52 The narrow-gauge Feve line along Spain’s north coast is used mainly by locals and is perfect slow travel. Spend a week or more (a 30-day pass is €88.90), hopping on and off at medieval towns, fishing villages and beaches. The route skirts the coast and twists inland through green valleys. Inntravel has a new one-week self-guided trip by train from Cudillero to Ribadesella (from £595, inntravel.co.uk). • renfe.com Trondheim to Bodø, Norway Duration: 453 miles/10hr Price: From £18 The Nordlandsbanen Railway is the longest in Norway, and the only one in the country to cross the Arctic Circle. From Trondheim, it passes farms, forests, mountains, rivers and fjords before reaching Bodø, for ferries to the Lofoten islands. A monument in the Saltfjellet mountains marks the Arctic Circle. From here, passengers can see the midnight sun in summer and, with luck, the northern lights in winter – there is a sleeper as well as two daytime trains. There are nearly 30 stations en route, and the line is included in the Norway Interrail pass (from £155, interrail.eu). • nsb.no Naples to Palermo, Italy Duration: 196 miles/9hr Price: £11 There is no need to fly to Sicily. There are direct rail services from Milan (overnight sleeper), Rome and Naples (day and night), with the trains shunted on to a ferry at Villa san Giovanni in Calabria to cross the Messina Strait. These are some of Europe’s few remaining passenger ferry trains. The Naples train skirts Vesuvius, then largely hugs the coastline all the way to the toe of Italy. Pack a picnic, as there is no catering on board. Once in Sicily, the train divides into two, one heading south past Etna on the way to Catania and Siracusa, the other going west to Palermo, the capital. • trenitalia.com Bastia to Ajaccio, Corsica Duration: 98 miles/3½ hours Price: £19 Corsica has 144 miles of narrow-gauge track, built through mountains over 22 years in the late 19th century. That enterprise, which took an incredible 22 years, has resulted in one of Europe’s most dramatic railways, with 32 tunnels and 52 bridges and viaducts, including one, the Pont du Vecchio, designed by Gustav Eiffel. The most spectacular stretch is between Corte and Bocognano, following the Gravona valley through gorges and past the spectacular 70-metre Bride’s Veil waterfall. Another line, from Ponte-Leccia to Calvi, hugs the north-west coast from L’Ile-Rousse. New flights started on 3 May from Stansted to Ajaccio, Bastia and Figura (from £98, aircorsica.com). • cf-corse.corsica Mostar to Sarajevo, Bosnia Duration: 73 miles/2hr Price: £5 Last summer, after two years of rebuilding, the line between Mostar and Sarajevo reopened with air-conditioned trains. This is a great train bargain, with rugged scenery, especially along the Neretva river. While the road sticks to the valley, the train climbs over the mountains, with viaducts, switchbacks and tunnels. From Sarajevo, there used to be a direct train to Zagreb, in Croatia. Negotiations between the two countries continue – check seat61.com for updates. • zfbh.ba AFRICA Johannesburg to Cape Town, South Africa Duration: 951 miles/26hr Price: £40 in a sleeper The Blue Train from Pretoria to Cape Town is one of the world’s most luxurious, with prices to match: from £895pp. But there are two non-luxury alternatives on the same route, starting in Johannesburg rather than Pretoria. The Shosholoza Meyl train is the cheapest, but still has sleeping cars and a restaurant. The Premier Classe train (from £189) has private sleepers, all meals included and a lounge-bar car. Passengers see exactly the same views of the Karoo desert, Hex river pass, Cape wine region and Table Mountain, but at a fraction of the cost. • shosholozameyl.co.za; southafricanrailways.co.za Addis Ababa to Djibouti City, East Africa Duration: 452 miles/13hr Price: From £26 For a real adventure, try the new line between Ethiopia and Djibouti, which opened last January with new trains and stations, replacing old tracks that shut in 2010. Trains call at Adama in the Rift Valley; cross the Awash river canyon over a 60-metre-high, 155-metre-long bridge; stop off at Ethiopia’s second city, colourful Dire Dawa; then finish at coastal Djibouti City. Tickets have to be booked in person at the station 24 hours in advance, and travellers should allow about 45 minutes for bag checks and immigration controls (you can’t board the train without a Djibouti visa). Ethiopia is planning other cross-border lines, to Kenya, Sudan and South Sudan, by 2020. Kapiri Mposhi to Dar es Salaam, Zambia/Tanzania Duration: 1,156 miles/46hr Price: From £17 The Tazara train is a great way to go on safari on a tiny budget. The route goes though Selous game reserve, one of the biggest in the world, for the chance to spot elephants, rhinos, hippos, lions, giraffes, zebras and more. That’s transport, two nights’ accommodation and wildlife viewing for under £20! By comparison, the luxury Rovos Rail tour follows the same route from Dar es Salaam before continuing to Angola or Cape Town, from £9,000 for 15 days. • tazarasite.com AMERICAS Los Mochis to Chihuahua, Mexico Duration: 406 miles/16hr Price: £53 If this route, with its 86 tunnels and 37 bridges, doesn’t give you a reason to look out the window we’re not sure what will. The train rides through the canyons of the Sierra Tarahumara as it runs from the coast to the city of Chihuahua. It’s the perfect route for a cross-country adventure – passengers can make up to three different overnight stops at no extra cost. • chepe.com.mx Sudbury to White River, Canada Duration: 298 miles/9hr Price: From £36 The epic, two-night Churchill to Winnipeg route – offering passengers the chance to spot everything from polar bears to the northern lights – is currently suspended after flooding damaged track and bridges. However, there are plenty of other Canadian rail adventures, such as this ride, informally called the Budd Car, that links many remote settlements in northern Ontario that are only accessible by rail. The wilderness route goes through rich forests and past shimmering, crystal-clear rivers, all of which travellers can gaze at in comfort through the train’s large windows. The train runs three times a week, and is particularly popular in October for the fall colours. • viarail.ca/en Anchorage to Fairbanks, Alaska Duration: 356 miles/12hr Price: From £137 The Denali Star is the Alaska Railroad’s flagship train, winding past rivers, canyons and mountains; highlights include the view from the Hurricane Gulch bridge (pictured), and, on a clear day, the sight of Denali, North America’s highest mountain. The journey can be spread over a few days, with nights in Anchorage and the national park (£600 for five nights). The trains runs daily from 16 May to 16 September, and on winter weekends and selected weekdays. • alaskarailroad.com Lima to Huancayo, Peru Duration: 206 miles/12hr Price: From £87 Most travellers to Peru will take the tourist train from Cusco to Machu Picchu. It’s a fun ride (albeit a busy one) but for a more unusual experience, try the journey from Lima to Huancayo, the charming capital of the central highlands. The second-highest passenger railway journey in the world, it reaches a height of 4,782 metres as it rolls through the Andes. Before planning a trip, however, note that the train only runs once or twice a month; check the website for timetables. • ferrocarrilcentral.com.pe ASIA Mettupalayam to Udagamandalam, India Duration: 29 miles/5hr Price: About 30p The Nilgiri Mountain Railway to Udagamandalam (or Ooty) hill station is India’s only rack and pinion railway, part of the Unesco-listed Mountain Railways of India. Its blue-and-cream trains ply the steepest track in Asia. The uphill leg takes about five hours, but it’s just three-and-a-half back down. It runs past ravines, tea plantations and forested hills; the train crosses 250 bridges and passes through 16 tunnels. This year, steam trains have been reintroduced, though priced for tourists (weekends to 24 June, from £8.60). Book well in advance. • irctc.co.in Colombo to Jaffna, Sri Lanka Duration: 190 miles/6¾hr Price: About £3.50 For decades northern Sri Lanka was virtually cut off by the civil war, and second city Jaffna lost population and prestige. But the line from the capital reopened in 2013, and now foreigners and Sri Lankans alike are exploring the city and its fascinating Tamil culture. Intercity trains are supposed to take less than seven hours, though delays are frequent. Reservable first- and second-class tickets go on sale 30 days in advance, but there’s no online booking: visitors need to use an agency such as visitsrilankatours.co.uk. Book well in advance to snaffle a seat in an observation car (selected trains only) with large windows for watching the scenery change from lush to dry, dotted with bright-striped Hindu temples. Xining to Lhasa, China/Tibet Duration: 1,225 miles/21hr Price: From £55 The Qinghai-Tibet Railway is the highest in the world, climbing to a breathtaking 5,231 metres at the Tanggula Pass. There are direct long-distance trains to Lhasa from several major Chinese cities, including Beijing and Shanghai, but it is advisable not to go straight there but to spend a couple of days acclimatising to the altitude in Xining (2,300 metres) along the way. (The train carriages do have oxygen pumped into them, though, and extra oxygen tubes for passengers.) Foreign nationals need a permit to enter Tibet – this is best arranged through an authorised travel agency. The scenery of the Tibetan plateau is breathtaking: arid steppe crisscrossed by frozen rivers, with a backdrop of snow-covered peaks. There are plans to extend the line to the subtropical town of Zhangmu on the Nepal border by 2020. Poipet to Sisophon, Cambodia Duration: 30 miles/1¼hr Price: Free (to 31 July) From 2009, there were no passenger trains in Cambodia. Then, in 2016, the southern line from the capital, Phnom Penh, to Sihanoukville in the south reopened. Last month, part of the northern line reopened, too, for the first time in 45 years. So far, there is just a short section in operation, from Poipet, on the Thai border, to Sisophon, Cambodia’s fourth city, but it will be extended south to popular Battambang at the end of the month, then on to Pursat and Phnom Penh (209 miles in total). Best of all, travel on the line is completely free until the end of July. A new route is also being planned between Phnom Penh and Vietnam’s Ho Chi Minh City. When both lines are completed, it will open up train travel between Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam. AUSTRALIA Belgrave to Gembrook, Victoria Duration: 15 miles/2hr Price: £28 Australia has mammoth train journeys, such as the 2,698-mile Indian Pacific from Sydney to Perth and the Ghan from Adelaide to Darwin. Puffing Billy is not like those: the century-old steam train chugs through the Dandenong Ranges near Melbourne. After the historic Monbulk Creek trestle bridge, it enters a ferny forest that’s home to echidnas and koalas. It is good for families, and a lot more manageable than a cross-country epic. • puffingbilly.com.au Browse The Guardian’s selection of some of the world’s best rail journeys on the Guardian Holidays website
4||Fit in my 40s: ‘I thought running clubs were a bit like raves in the 90s’I got into a sorry state with the run/wash/run cycle (I take it you’re familiar with this fitness-behavioural conundrum: you don’t have a shower because you’re going for a run, then you never get round to going for a run, then on day two you have to have a shower, because civilisation, then you can’t go for a run because you’ve just had a shower) and needed motivation. This means a personal trainer if you’re rich or get stuff for free, or a running club, which can cost nothing (and is sometimes a fiver). I thought that running clubs operated a bit like raves in the 90s: you know they exist because you see people going to and from them, but you don’t know where they meet. But actually all you have to do is search online. I found therunningclublondon.com in about five seconds, and it’s free, but they look like a fast crowd, the kind of people who can wear parachute-silk shorts without making anyone laugh. I wanted a mixed-ability vibe, a place with different groups for beginners, and I found it. I won’t tell you which one, because my first observation was, these are not my people. It was the first beautiful day after an unending winter, and just as I thought, “Who would go running on a day like this?” a guy during the warm-up said, “Who wouldn’t go running on a day like this?” The warm-up was much longer than I would do on my own, which is to say, it was the right length. About 10 minutes capering about and running sideways. Very much like an inclusive cycling club, they said they have separate loops for different levels, but the bald truth was, there were no other beginners, and kind-hearted people who should be in intermediate took the low road in order to be encouraging. This made me feel awful. They were still a bit fast for my liking, and I felt guilty about them going slower for me. They run for longer than I would (40 minutes: I balk at anything over 30) and they have a passion for it that I can’t match. I didn’t put on any music in case someone wanted to address me with a motivational remark, and this brought my spirits down further. For God’s sake! I have been doing this all year. I shouldn’t still be like the new girl in a Zumba class, bright red and getting my feet in the wrong order. It transpires that I plateaued some time ago, and the plain upon which I’m marooned is not very high. I’ve definitely been running, in the technical sense that I spent some time between each step entirely off the ground, so was definitely not walking. But there was not much else, give or take some enthusiastic arms, to distinguish it from a walk. So the question is, do you want to enjoy yourself, or do you want to get better? You can’t do both and, frankly, running slowly isn’t that enjoyable either. After a lot of carping, therefore, I come down heavily in favour of a running club, if not for me, then certainly for you. What I learned Your calorie usage is directly proportional to how fast you run. A 10-stone person would burn 342 calories doing half an hour at 6mph, but 458 at 8mph. Maybe that sounds obvious to everyone; it wasn’t to me.
7||British cheese boom driven by stilton – and mozzarellaA British cheese boom is under way, driven by changing tastes in Asia and soaring demand for UK-made mozzarella, cottage cheese and stilton as well as traditional cheddar. The value of cheese exports soared 23% to £615m in 2017, according to the latest HMRC data. Sales to the Philippines rose 27% while the amount exported to China has rocketed from 49 tonnes in 2015 to 786 tonnes last year. Cheddar makes up more than 4o% of exports, but mozzarella and fresh cheese, such as curds and cottage cheese, are faster growing, with both up 14% last year in terms of volume. The amount of British mozzarella sold to the US jumped 43% last year while sales also soared in Hong Kong, Spain, the Netherlands, Denmark and Pakistan according to the data. Patty Clayton, a senior analyst at the agriculture and horticulture development board, said the growth was partly the result of a rise in cheese prices around the world because production has fallen in Europe while demand continued to rise. The decline in the value of the pound since the Brexit vote has made British cheese more competitive. “There’s domestic European demand but there’s also growth in consumption in Asia as they start to get a taste for cheese and butter as well,” she said. However, Chinese buyers are not necessarily interested in our finest cheeses: more than half the cheese sent to China was powdered or grated cheese for use in ready meals, according to Clayton. Jason Hinds, co-owner of Neal’s Yard Dairy, which exports a wide range of British cheeses including Cornish yarg, stilton and cheddar to 15 markets around the world, said the fall in the value of the pound had helped make his product cheaper. “The devaluation of the currency has allowed us to bring our prices down and that’s had an effect, while in Europe there’s an economic confidence that hasn’t existed for most of the last 10 years,” Hinds said. He said a change in attitude in France, where buyers are now more interested in British and other quality foreign cheeses, had also helped make the continent Neal’s Yard fastest growing market. “As more shops become aware that there is great cheese in England we have become a destination for people,” he said. The group’s fastest growing category is stilton with the blue cheese offering something not easy to find in France or elsewhere.Former environment secretary Liz Truss may have declared the fact that the UK imports two-thirds of its cheese “a disgrace” in disarmingly passionate Tory party conference speech, but dramatic growth in new markets including China, the Philippines and Lebanon as well as a rise in ensured the country remains a big cheese worldwide. A spokesperson for Glanbia Cheese, one of Europe’s biggest mozzarella makers with two factories based in Wales and Northern Ireland, said it was seeing growth in the Middle East but its biggest markets were still in Europe, especially Germany, France, Spain and even Italy. He said sales were strongly linked to pizza eating: “Mozzarella is the most international of all cheeses. Most is consumed on a pizza, so growth is very much driven by the love of pizza.”
6||Overdrafts: can you cut the cost of yours?Labour this week pledged to cap overdraft costs for millions of hard-pressed bank account holders, promising an average saving of £86 a year. However, there are things people can do right now to reduce their overdraft costs. Official figures show that 25% of all UK adults have been overdrawn in the last 12 months, and the charges levied add up to about £1.2bn a year . The UK’s financial watchdogs have become increasingly concerned, and some banks, perhaps sensing that the writing is on the wall, have amended their charges. But Labour wants to go further, promising a cap of £24 per month per £100 borrowed on any interest, fees and charges related to the overdraft, including charges for declined payments. It would also impose a cap of 100% of the amount borrowed where someone is in persistent overdraft. Here are steps you can take now. • Get a better overdraft deal If you are not getting a good deal, think about switching. Authorised overdraft costs vary hugely. Some banks impose daily fees, some monthly, some charge interest on the amount owed, and some use a combination of these. Many banks have overdraft calculators on their websites, so log on and compare what you would be charged at other institutions. Let’s take the example of a standard current account-holder who borrows £500 on an authorised overdraft over seven days. If he/she is a NatWest customer, they will be charged £7.75 (£6 monthly fee and £1.75 interest), while if they are at the meltdown-hit TSB, it’s £7.66 (£6 monthly fee plus £1.66 interest). If they are at Barclays, it’s £5.25 (75p a day up to £1,000) at the Halifax it’s £4.98 (a daily overdraft fee of 1p for every £7 you borrow, in this case it’s six lots of 71p and one of 72p). Some current account holders are coughing up a lot less: a First Direct customer pays 71p in interest – there are no extra fees for authorised overdrafts. A Tesco Bank account-holder pays £1.81 in interest. Nationwide says its lowest cost is £1.67 in interest for its FlexAccount, or £3.50 (50p a day) for FlexDirect and FlexPlus. Payment body Bacs, which runs the current account switch service, says you can switch your current account if you are overdrawn. Your new bank may be able to provide facilities to help you pay off your existing overdraft. • Talk to your bank If you think you will go over your limit, contact your bank and ask for a higher limit or an extension. You might be charged a fee, but it will probably be cheaper than an unauthorised overdraft, says the Money Advice Service. • Sign up for alerts If money’s tight, keep track of your account balance by downloading your bank’s app and setting up text alerts. The Financial Conduct Authority found that signing up to text alerts and using a banking app reduced monthly unauthorised overdraft charges by 24% on average. As of February-March this year, in a rule change required by the Competition and Markets Authority, banks must now set up an alert system that will help their customers avoid unnecessary charges. A number of banks already had alert systems in place, but the new rules require all banks to send these alerts – through texts or a mobile banking app – and to implement other measures such as a grace period in which people can transfer money into their account to avoid being charged.
5||Elisabeth Moss on The Handmaid’s Tale: ‘This is happening in real life. Wake up, people’“We knew that we were doing something important,” says Samira Wiley, reflecting on the feelings of the cast and creators of The Handmaid’s Tale in the months running up to the show’s launch last spring. “We knew that we were making something with a lot of integrity. But we definitely didn’t mean for it to be that timely and that relevant.” Nine months later, the television adaptation of Margaret Atwood’s seminal dystopian novel was not only sweeping the boards at every awards ceremony – remarkable for a new show, with such dark, brutal themes – but had rapidly become a social phenomenon, too: a symbol of the new resistance, with the handmaids’ uniform co-opted by protesters at US courthouses, on marches, and in Hollywood itself. “When we were arriving at the Golden Globes, there were a bunch of handmaids outside,” recalls Wiley, who plays Moira, rebellious best friend of the main protagonist Offred. The group, calling themselves the Hollywood Handmaids, were holding a silent protest to demand an end to sexual assaults and inequalities in the industry. “It has been absolutely crazy,” says Wiley, shaking her head in disbelief. Certainly, the fervour surrounding the series is unprecedented, which is all the more exceptional considering that Atwood wrote the story in 1984. There have been previous adaptations, too: a 1990 film written by Harold Pinter and starring Natasha Richardson, plus an opera and a ballet. But none have sparked the torrent of memes, slogan T-shirts bearing lines from the book, and even, apparently, tattoos of its quotable mantras. The phenomenal success of the series has, of course, been assisted by the story’s prescience: it’s set in a fundamentalist theocracy where women and minorities have been stripped of all rights, the former no longer even allowed to read or write, and all but the top 1% forced into servitude and ranked according to their fertility. And if, a few short months into the Trump presidency, season one arrived into an atmosphere of bewildered anxiety, then season two, which hits UK screens later this month, has landed in an atmosphere of radicalised action, with the #MeToo and Time’s Up movements demanding the end of widespread cultures of misogyny, sexual harassment and abuse. On a sub-zero day in Toronto, Canada, I visit the set of the show to meet the cast and creators. Such is the secrecy surrounding the production that all correspondence with the team regarding my visit refers to the show as “Rocket Woman”, a security measure designed to avert overexcited fans, but also any fundamentalist groups who might object to its themes, I am told. As season one ended exactly as the novel did – with a pregnant Offred bundled into a van – this second series will not be Atwood’s story, moving beyond the content of the classic text. She is a consultant on the show, and approves the scripts. However, “that doesn’t mean I have veto power”, the author recently told Newsweek. “No one would ever give an author that; you’d be really foolish to do so.” That simultaneously bestows both freedom and pressure on the show’s writers, on top of already enormous expectations. “The way we made the first season, which was in great ignorance, is exactly the way we’re trying to make the second season,” says showrunner Bruce Miller, as he shows me around the sprawling set. “We try not to think about people out there dissecting it, but instead just think about making something that’s cool.’ Elisabeth Moss, a producer on the show as well as its star, also points out that the first season was not a simple facsimile of the book, either: timelines were altered, some details were changed, while partial sentences were extrapolated from the text to create entire scenes and stories. “We were faithful to the idea and the tone and the messages of the book,” she says, “but we kept characters alive that died and we did things that were never in the book, so we’re not afraid of that.” Nor, if the season opener is anything to go by, are the team afraid of pushing the boundaries of bleak, brutal barbarism even further than in the first series. It is tense, harrowing and bloody; the very opposite of an easy watch. In a timely echo of 2018, one theme explored is that of solidarity. “One of the saddest things about season one for me was Serena [the Commander’s wife, for whom Offred is meant to be bearing a child] not having any solidarity with Offred, or with any of the handmaids,” says Moss. “In season two, we start to think about the fact that if these women actually banded together, they could overthrow Gilead. That’s a very powerful idea.” Miller admits that, while the writers did not seek to weave threads from current news events – such as the #MeToo movement – into the story, it is impossible not to be influenced by the political and social context in which The Handmaid’s Tale is made and consumed. “I try to let the audience figure out the relationship between the show and the real world, and how it’s interpreted and where it’s put in a political context,” he says. “But one of the things the writing staff brought this year was that – because of the more polarised discussions happening all over the world, but especially in the US, including the #MeToo movement – you’re starting to hear people verbalise things you didn’t think people thought any more.” This season will also see an expansion of the world that Atwood created: the Colonies, the toxic waste dumps to which “Unwomen” are exiled; and Little America, in Canada, where refugees from Gilead are living. “There’s also a scene that addresses journalism in Gilead,” says Moss. “It’s really intense. But it needs to be addressed. Because, what would have happened to journalists?” she asks, rhetorically. In Gilead, environmental factors have caused the birth rate to plunge to near zero and the few fertile women are installed as forced breeders for the barren wives of the Commanders of the Faithful. The ages of Serena Joy (Yvonne Strahovski), along with that of her husband, Commander Fred Waterford (Joseph Fiennes), were a major detail altered for the adaptation; both are significantly younger on screen than in the book. “[Offred] and I being the same age adds an extra layer of jealousy and a devastation,” says Strahovski. “Here’s a woman who is my age, who can do the things that I want to do – ie have children – but I can’t.” For Fiennes, whose character has sex with Offred every month, against her will, in a bid to get her pregnant, the burden of playing a rapist – albeit one committing an act sanctioned by the ruling order – does not sit easily. “I am repulsed by it,” he says, simply. “I am very affected by some of the things we have to do, this season in particular, I have found some of it very difficult.” Much of the most egregious brutality of season one was meted out by – or, at least, on the orders of – Aunt Lydia, the enforcer of the handmaids’ compliance, played by Ann Dowd. “I think she thought, ‘This is not going to be tough, not at all. I’m going to get these girls in order,’” reflects Dowd. “I think the difference for her, for season two, is that she’s far more challenged than she anticipated she would be. I don’t mean to say that she is subversive – she’s all in [with the regime], still – but she realises it’s not such a straight shot, and all these young women are not all the same.” In seeking to build an authentic world beyond that outlined in the book, Miller and his team drew – as Atwood did in her original story – on history, creating a meticulously detailed mythology for Gilead. This explains why the outwardly pious Commanders of the Faith have based themselves in Cambridge, Massachusetts, north of Boston, rather than Washington DC. “It’s not the traditional seat of power, but in America it’s the seat of intellectual power, and Boston has such a huge place in our Puritan history,” Miller explains. He says he has an unusual advantage in being able to question Atwood directly about her own inspirations. “Usually when you adapt a classic, the author is long gone,” says Miller. “But not only is Margaret very much around, she also has a spectacular memory about what she was thinking when she wrote The Handmaid’s Tale.” One criticism levelled at the first season was the show’s depiction of race. While Miller deliberately created a multiracial world (unlike in the original book, in which minorities had been exiled), the show did not deal with, or mention, racism. Among other critical voices, New York magazine described this as the show’s “greatest failing”. How those criticisms have been taken on board in the storylines for season two remains to be seen, but some cast members say that such issues are influencing their performances. “I watched a lot of movies on slavery, just to see how characters moved,” says Amanda Brugel, the mixed-race actor who plays Rita, one of Gilead’s low-ranking domestic servants, whose story will be more prominent this season. “I especially watched the women who were slaves, versus a character in our show like Serena Joy, who’s lived a life of freedom. I very much lean on past experiences in which I felt like I have actually been a different class, and a slave, in situations just because of my colour,” she says. Moss and I speak again, a few weeks after my visit to the set, on the day of the March for Our Lives, held across US cities and organised by the surviving students of the Parkland school shootings. Donald Trump has suggested, as a solution to the growing tide of similar tragedies, arming teachers in schools. “When I heard that, I got chills,” says Moss. “Because I’m on set with a man pretending to hold a machine gun, in a situation that he just shouldn’t have one in.” The parallels between the current rapid militarisation of the US and Gilead are undeniable. “In the book, Margaret calls it the new normal,” Moss continues. “It’s a line that Aunt Lydia says – this will all be normal to you one day. That’s scary to me.” She has no tolerance, however, for people who find the show itself frightening. “I hate hearing that someone couldn’t watch it because it was too scary,” she says. “Not because I care about whether or not they watch my TV show; I don’t give a shit. But I’m like, ‘Really? You don’t have the balls to watch a TV show? This is happening in your real life. Wake up, people. Wake up.’” The Handmaid’s Tale returns to Channel 4 in May
4||A letter to... my dad who needs to be with my late mumI came to see you yesterday, though you would have already forgotten my visit by the time I got back home. We looked at the photo albums together, as we often do. I am sorry I put that confusing one of me and my girls, taken when the younger one was a baby, on the same page as the picture of that baby, grown up now, with her own baby. That really was hard to fathom, wasn’t it? You also looked puzzled at my wedding photo, with you and Mum standing beside me, because sometimes you think I am Mum, who died when she was roughly the age I am now. I gave you a bar of chocolate and separated the squares. You saved two for me, indicating that they were mine. I like the way your sense of fair shares has not completely vanished. When I got up to leave, you asked if I was all right for money. I assured you I was fine and you said to let you know if I needed any help. You would be horrified if you knew the nursing home fees. Luckily, you don’t remember the house we sold to pay for them. The head nurse told me that you were getting less steady on your feet and warned me that you would eventually forget how to walk. I have mixed feelings about this, because at least there will be less risk of a fall if you are obliged to sit and be transported in a wheelchair. You have been there two years now. Who knows how much longer you will last? You still have a good appetite but you’re very restless at night. Your body clock is shot to pieces so you sleep a lot during the day. How long before you take to your bed all the time? How long before you succumb to a chest infection? I wonder what you would have said if you had known that your final years would be spent like this. Would you have begged to be put out of your misery? I couldn’t do it, so I couldn’t ask the doctor to do it either. “Thou shalt not kill” is ingrained in me. But it doesn’t stop me feeling angry that God has not let you be with your beloved wife before now. Once, when you could still talk coherently, I asked you how you had met Mum. I knew the answer, but liked to hear the story. “I didn’t meet her,” you replied. “She drew me towards her whole being.” Now, isn’t it time she did that again? • We will pay £25 for every letter we publish. Email family@theguardian.com, including your address and phone number. We are able to reply only to those whose contributions we are going to use.
6||‘My salary nosedived after I moved to Orkney, but I’m happier here’We moved to Orkney for the good life 15 years ago. It was a bit of a leap in the dark, for we’d only experienced the island from our honeymoon and holidays and we knew it would be a one-way trip because we could not now afford a home on the mainland. My husband and I had been renting a tiny flat in Edinburgh and we swapped that for a three-bedroom, 18th century house on the harbour front on Orkney for which the rent was 40% less. My salary nosedived, however. I had been manager of a tour company in Edinburgh earning £16,000 a year. When we decided that we were tired of city life I worked freelance for a while, earning about £6,000. I then got a job with Orkney Islands council looking after the 12th century St Magnus Cathedral. I’m now on £17,000. We have very little disposable income and, because on Orkney winters are long and prices high, we live in borderline fuel poverty. There are only six hours of daylight in the depths of winter and our electricity bill is £2,000 a year. Solid fuel costs us £25 a week. When we made our lifestyle change we accepted that we would have to be more self-sufficient and spend less on clothes and nightlife and non-essentials. Prices are higher here because everything has to be brought across the water, and locally produced things tend to be high-end and more expensive. Yet I find it easier to live frugally here than in Edinburgh. It’s the Orcadian tradition to make do and mend. It was part of the deal that we would keep hens and grow vegetables and after five years of renting we bought a one-bedroom cottage for £120,000. It’s tiny. You can just about fit four people in the living room. But it has a third of an acre and 360° views over the Atlantic, the mainland mountains, the island and lochs. We make our own wine, cook meals from scratch, spending about £60 a week on ingredients, and go out for dinner only a couple of times a year, but our social life is better than it ever was in the city. In winter especially people will take a cake round to each other’s houses. The local hall does monthly quiz nights for £1.50 which includes a cup of tea and sandwiches, and I play in a folk band. I’m also chair of the Orcadian Storytelling Trust, organising an annual festival. As a storyteller and tourist guide I can earn an extra £500 to £1,000 a year. Holidays are a couple of visits a year to family on the mainland and we usually stay with them or in a tent. B&amp;Bs or hotels are a last-night luxury. Our two cars are the biggest expenditure. They are essential because public transport is very limited and my commute to work is 20 miles each way. The mortgage repayments are £400 a month and council tax £1,300. I pay £20 for a monthly mobile phone package and we have a basic telephone and broadband deal. £40 a month goes to charity. I wish I understood more about money and how it works. I have two degrees and a management diploma and work a 40-hour week running almost all aspects of Orkney’s biggest tourist attraction. Public sector pay increases do not keep up with inflation so in real terms I am getting less each year and I worry about when I retire. I pay £100 a month into AVC pension contributions and put £300 a month into savings accounts. I’m not advocating communism but I have never understood why some jobs are worth 10 times more than others. I feel I should be earning more. I’d like a bigger house with an extra bedroom so we can have friends to stay and space for the hundreds of books I have in storage. And I’d love more land so we could start a smallholding. Having said that, our quality of life is very high if you love ancient monuments, fantastic scenery and wildlife, and a rich social and cultural life. I’m happier here than I’ve ever been anywhere.
12||NT camp water still contaminated two weeks after alertA Northern Territory community is still unable to drink water from the town’s supply more than two weeks after unsafe levels of lead and manganese were detected. Garawa 1, a town camp in Borroloola, near the Gulf of Carpentaria, was given the all clear on Friday afternoon, but Garawa 2 remains on a precautionary warning to avoid drinking, brushing teeth, or preparing food using the camp’s water. There is no indication from government about how long the Indigenous community will have to wait to drink their water, or about the cause of the contamination. Around 200 people live across the two camps. A 16,000 page review of town camps released last month recommended “urgent” upgrades to the water systems of both camps. On Friday evening the NT department of health said two rounds of water sample testing at Garawa 1 were confirmed to have no trace of lead or manganese. The levels in Garawa 2 have subsided but remain above safety limits set by the Australian drinking water guidelines of 0.01mg/L for lead and 0.5mg/L for manganese. The test results revealed levels of 0.011mg/L and 0.65mg/L respectively. Following the first detection, residents of both camps were told to get water from a tanker, supplied for the purpose, or from bottled water or sources in Borroloola. Worried residents demanded blood testing. There is no indication the contamination is related to the nearby lead and zinc mine at McArthur River, which has previously been linked to lead levels in fish stocks around the lease site, and tests determined the contamination was not in Garawa’s bore. “PWC (PowerWater Corp) is therefore investigating to see if the source of the contamination is in the water pipework; for example, corrosion,” the department of health said last week. The use of lead pipes ended around the 1930s, but lead solder was used on some pipes and fittings in Australia until about 1989. The department of housing and community and community development told Guardian Australia that “generally” the reticulation system at the Garawa camps was made of PVC plastic. However, while “relatively good information concerning the reticulation system is available for Garawa 1, [it is] limited for Garawa 2,” the spokeswoman said. “Further investigation will be carried out to improve the understanding of the pipe network at Garawa 2.” The department didn’t know when the pipes were installed, and said they were only replaced in the event of failure. The department of housing did not respond to questions on how the pipes will be tested. The NT government has only had responsibility for the town camps since 2008, prior to that it was under the Commonwealth government. A review of town camps, commissioned by the NT government and released last month, recommended millions of dollars in works to upgrade the two camps’ water supply in order to get it up to current design standards. The review, which assessed Garawa 1 and 2 in late 2016, did not conduct any “intrusive excavations or potholing of buried services” and did not make any findings about the condition of the the pipes. It determined the supply – through a local bore and storage tank – was “inadequate”, but the rest of the network was “generally compliant with PWC standards”. Residents reported to the investigators they often ran out of water, and the main tanks were too small. “There are concerns about the condition of the storage tank and the ability of the supply to meet demands,” the report said. “It is proposed that the Borroloola town network is extended across the river, connecting to Garawa 1 and Garawa 2 as a matter of urgency.” The estimated costs for Garawa 1 were $14,000 to maintain the current system or $3.75m to bring it up to current design standards. The respective costs for Garawa 2 were $1,000 and $3.62m. In response to the report, which estimated a cost of more than $77.7m to bring all town camps up to current standard, the NT government pledged $25m in works, which began last week with upgrades in the Bagot town camp in Darwin. Last week’s Territory budget revealed $15m was earmarked for 2017/18, and $9m for 2018/19. No further details were provided.
5||Saturday’s best TV: Who Wants to be a Millionaire; SalamanderWho Wants to Be a Millionaire? 9.15pm, ITV ITV is hardly shy of gambling on leftfield gameshow hosts, as it proved by picking Giles Coren for glitzy primetime quiz 500 Questions two years ago. With Jeremy Clarkson set to reboot the redoubtable Millionaire, however, it’s tempting to suspect the opinionated petrolhead is sitting in the wrong vehicle. ITV’s scheduling suggests confidence,placing an episode every night this week, as with Chris Tarrant’s original Millionaire in 1998. But will the public go for such a divisive figure? That’s the million-pound question. Mark Gibbings-Jones Harry Hill’s Alien Fun Capsule 7.30pm, ITV The “bonkers” panel show, as Edmonds/Partridge might put it, continues with two teams attempting to persuade an army of invading aliens we’re actually worth saving. An uphill struggle, some would say, given almost any recent news headline. Still, the likes of Janet Street-Porter and Una Stubbs give it their best shot. Ali Catterall Britain’s Got Talent 8pm, ITV It’s the fourth audition round and the contestants are the standard mix of eccentric and quite good, which is part of the charm at this stage of BGT. In previous weeks, dancing aliens made it through, but twerkers dressed as a zebra and a monkey somehow didn’t. Will there be any justice tonight? Hannah Verdier Britain’s Most Historic Towns 8pm, Channel 4 The penultimate episode of the series seeking to provide an impression of what life was like during our turbulent past. Alice Roberts explores the Regency period by studying Cheltenham, Britain’s most Regency town. She also attends a period society ball, and explores that era’s fondness for enemas. Candice Carty-Williams Salamander 9pm, BBC Four Once again, a conspiracy is impinging directly on the family life of stolid cop Paul Gerardi as handsome Jamie’s machinations bring the blood-diamond affair even closer to home. Elsewhere, as the entertaining Belgian thriller continues, Jacky leaves custody in the company of René. Jonathan Wright Secrets of Tutankhamun’s Treasures 9.15pm, Channel 5 It is nearly a century since the Egyptian tomb was reopened and it’s tough to imagine what secrets this much-scrutinised archaeological hoard could have left to yield. This episode focuses on Tutankhamun’s death mask, and the theory that it wasn’t actually his. Andrew Mueller TV films Letters from Iwo Jima, 9pm, TCM Clint Eastwood’s companion piece to his Flags of Our Fathers examines the epic second world war battle for Iwo Jima from the Japanese standpoint, focusing on the defenders’ commander, General Kuribayashi (an eloquent Ken Watanabe), and a lowly trooper (Kazunari Ninomiya). Paul Howlett Live sport Snooker: World Championship The second semi continues. 10am, BBC Two FA Cup Football: Arsenal Women v Chelsea Ladies The final from Wembley Stadium. 5.10pm, BBC One Golf: The Wells Fargo Championship The third day’s play at the Quail Hollow Club in Charlotte, North Carolina. 8pm, Sky Sports Main Event
14||'I'm glad we spoke out': Windrush victim who shone a light on the scandalThe immigration minister, Caroline Nokes, sounded genuine when she turned to Paulette Wilson, a former House of Commons canteen worker, during a packed Windrush hearing in parliament on Tuesday and said: “Particularly Mrs Wilson, I wanted to say that I was personally sorry to you, and I mean that most sincerely.” The apology was a significant moment in a tumultuous six-month period during which Wilson, who has lived in the UK for 50 years, was wrongly classified as an illegal immigrant, held in Yarl’s Wood immigration detention centre and removed to Heathrow where she was threatened with deportation to Jamaica – a country she has not visited since she was 10. In the past six months, she has made the brave decision to go public with her experiences, giving an interview to the Guardian that triggered the gradual exposure of the Windrush scandal, which this week led to the resignation of the home secretary on Sunday. Wilson, 61, was delighted to return to the House of Commons for the first time since she left her job there in the early 1990s. She visited the canteen overlooking the river Thames where she had spent about a year clearing trays after MPs and parliament staff had finished their meals. On Tuesday night, she ate supper in the Commons’ Strangers’ Dining Room (where MPs can take guests), with her MP, Emma Reynolds. She was surprised and delighted to meet former colleagues who had been working there for the past 30 years. It was a very emotional and happy evening for her and her daughter Natalie Barnes. Wilson is still processing the full impact of her decision to speak out about her detention, as the government promises that the Home Office will become more “humane”, “fairer” and “compassionate”. Even if this new approach never materialises – and the repeal of some legislation would be required before things can really change – Wilson is just extremely happy that so many other people’s terrible experiences have been exposed, as a result of her account of her own treatment. “I did not realise that my story was going to become this big and bring out a lot of people with this problem. People are dying because of this, because they have nowhere to turn and no one to talk to,” she said. Wilson had agreed only reluctantly last November to speak about her immigration difficulties. One of the reasons that Windrush victims’ problems have remained hidden for so long is that it takes a lot of courage to talk publicly about having been categorised as an illegal immigrant – both generally at a time of great public hostility towards all kinds of immigrants, but particularly when the Home Office is still sending you letters informing you that you are liable for deportation. She wonders if her problems began when she approached pension age, and suspects her files may have been looked at as she was transferred on to pension department books. She lost her home in 2015, a few months after the Department for Work and Pensions stopped her disability benefit payments. “They took my flat away,” Wilson said. Barnes was amazed to hear that her mother had been classified as an illegal immigrant. For a while Wilson was so frightened at the letters she was getting from the Home Office that she did not tell her daughter about them. When her daughter found out, she was briefly quite angry with her mother. “I never, ever once thought that my mum was an illegal immigrant. I asked her why she hadn’t told me.” “I thought I was English,” Wilson said. On 18 October 2017, Wilson was detained at the Wolverhampton Home Office reporting centre where she had been reporting on a fortnightly basis since August 2015. She was put in a vehicle that reminded her of a “meat van”, because it had no windows, and taken to Yarl’s Wood for six days; she says this was the worst experience of her life. She called her daughter from the detention centre and cried uncontrollably down the line. “I said: ‘Get me out of here, Natalie, please get me out of here.’” After six days she was put in another van, and when she got out she realised she was being taken to a building next to Heathrow airport; she was told that she would be put on a plane the next day. It was only at the last minute that she was released, given a travel warrant for train tickets and let out to make her way back to Wolverhampton. “The planes were taking off over my head; I had to put my hands to my ears because of the noise,” she said. Wilson wonders if official racism was behind her treatment. As a child in Wolverhampton, she remembers being called “little black Sambo” and told “go back to your own country” and she got into fights occasionally at school because of these comments. But until this happened in 2015, she did not think racism was particularly prevalent here and she is reluctant to see Britain overall as a bad place, despite the terrible treatment she has endured over the past three years. “I have had a really good life here,” she said. But she was frustrated at the refusal of officials to listen to her repeated protestations that she was not an illegal immigrant. Usually when she went to report, staff did not want to speak to her at all. “When you go to the Home Office, they check you, they take your belt, give you a piece of paper, when your number comes up on the screen, you go to the desk, they go: tick, tick, tick and then tell you that you can go,” she said. Barnes said she tried repeatedly to get staff to realise a mistake had been made. “I got banned from the Home Office [reporting centre] because of my questions and because I was telling them that my mum is not illegal, she is a British citizen. They told me that they can’t answer any questions through the screen, that you have to speak to your caseworker. They said we had a caseworker, but we never, ever met one in two and a half years, so I don’t know,” she said. Wilson said she felt the political crisis had not ended with Rudd’s resignation. “I’m not a political person, but they’re hiding something. This has been going on for a very long time,” she said. She has still not been told why she was released or why she was detained in the first place. “I still don’t know,” she said. Over supper she reflected on her lucky escape. “Just imagine if I had been deported to Jamaica. Where would I have gone? I don’t know anybody there.” Barnes said she had been very nervous about encouraging her mother to speak to the media about her situation, but when she met other Windrush victims in the House of Commons on Tuesday, she realised how important her mother’s story had been. “I’m so glad we spoke out and I’m so glad it meant so many other people came forward with their stories and that now they are all being recognised as British citizens – which is what they are. This has changed my mum: it has brought her confidence back. She can’t stop smiling,” she said.
18||Three guitar heroes for a new eraIs the guitar dying? Ten years after the recession, the industry has seen its share of struggle: the 2,633,000 units sold in the US in 2017 falls about 5% short of the 2008 figure, according to Music Trades magazine. But the instrument may not be dead yet. Here are three acts that could save the guitar: St Vincent AKA Annie Clark Serious sophistication with a deep bag of tricks. Began playing as a 12-year-old in Garland, Texas. Harmonic stylings one moment, chokehold solos the next. Plays a personal Sterling by Music Man signature series electric guitar. Niece of the virtuoso Tuck Andress of the jazz duo Tuck and Patti. Courtney Barnett Warmth of tone with indie rock antennae and a catalogue of irresistible riffs. A southpaw. Nominated for a best new artist Grammy in 2015. Her album Tell Me How You Really Feel is due out on 18 May. Hails from Melbourne, Australia. Waxahatchee AKA Katie Crutchfield Punk practitioner with the charisma to go solo acoustic. Wears a Rilo Kiley tattoo. With her sister Allison backing her on vocals can move from Go-Gos to grunge and back.
4||Stephen Collins on weeds – cartoon
3||Two centuries on, Karl Marx feels more revolutionary than everThe other day I stood at the grave of Karl Marx in Highgate cemetery in north London, wondering if he has anything say to us today, 200 years after his birth, on 5 May 1818. “Workers of all lands unite,” reads the tombstone. But they haven’t – the solidarity of the exploited, which Marx took to be necessary to end capitalism, scarcely exists. “What the bourgeoisie produces, above all, are its own gravediggers,” he and Friedrich Engels wrote 170 years ago in The Communist Manifesto. “Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable.” Not really: capitalism today is rampant. In the kind of historical irony that the philosopher Hegel called the cunning of reason, capitalism has even co-opted its gravediggers to keep it alive: China, the world’s biggest socialist society (if only ostensibly) supplies capitalist enterprises with cheap labour that undercuts other workers around the world. So is Marx finished? Not at all. For me, what makes Marx worth reading now is not his Panglossian prognoses, but his still resonant diagnoses. For instance, he and Engels foresaw how globalisation would work. “In place of the old wants,” they wrote, “satisfied by the production of the country, we find new wants, requiring for their satisfaction the products of distant lands and climes.” That’s why Chinese workers make products we never conceived would exist, let alone that we would covet, and that would convert us into politically quiescent, borderline sociopathic, sleepwalking narcissists. That’s right – I’m talking about iPhones. I find it hard to read the first few pages of The Communist Manifesto without thinking that I live in the world he and Engels described. “Constant revolutionising of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones.” We inhabit a world just like that, only more intensely than Marx and Engels dared imagine. For me, these words don’t just capture how Uber, Deliveroo and the other virtuosos of the gig economy chip away at values and standards to make a fast buck, but also how the planet is relentlessly despoiled in order to satisfy tax-avoiding shareholders. Consider, as the Marxist professor David Harvey did recently, São Paulo: a city whose economic base is a car industry that produces vehicles that spend hours in traffic jams, polluting streets and isolating individuals from each other – a potent emblem of how free-market economies are inimical to the real needs of real people. Marx didn’t foresee Facebook, but he grasped the essentials of Mark Zuckerberg’s business model, certainly better than American senators did at last month’s congressional hearings. “The bourgeoisie,” Marx and Engels wrote, beautifully, “has left remaining no other nexus between man and man than naked self- interest, than callous ‘cash payment’. It has drowned the most heavenly ecstasies of religious fervour, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of philistine sentimentalism, in the icy water of egotistical calculation.” Facebook, not to mention Amazon and Google, have made humans into exploitable assets. Which is some kind of genius. But it’s what Marx wrote in Das Kapital in 1867 on commodity fetishism that, I think, is most painfully relevant to us today. By that term he meant how the ordinary things that workers produce – iPads, cars, even the spate of new books commemorating Marx’s 200th birthday – become, under capitalism, bewitchingly strange. Just as in some religions an object invested with supernatural powers becomes a fetish for those who worship it, so commodities under capitalism are accorded magical powers. When an iPhone is sold, it is exchanged for another commodity (generally money). The exchange takes no account of the labour that went into the iPhone’s making, still less the fact that some of Apple’s underpaid workers have contemplated suicide in order to escape their lives manufacturing purportedly must-have gizmos for you and me. “A commodity, therefore, is a mysterious thing simply because in it the social character of men’s labour appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labour,” wrote Marx. György Lukács, who profoundly influenced the Frankfurt School of thinkers, argued that a new kind of human arises in a world where commodity fetishism is rampant. Those new humans are so degraded that buying and selling is their essence: I shop therefore I am. Instead of uniting to end capitalism, we buy more shoes. When JD Sports announced a 24% rise in profits last month, for me it felt less like good news for the ailing British high street than footwear fetishism propping up the degrading system that Lukács described. We’ve been took, as Malcolm X put it, in another context. We’ve been had. In such a world it’s easy to collapse, as many of the Frankfurt School did, into the philosophical quietism that drove Marx nuts. “The philosophers,” he wrote in words also emblazoned on his tombstone, “have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point, however, is to change it.” That remains the challenge. We need Marx to help us understand the state we’re in, though that is only a prelude to the bigger struggle, for which his writings are less helpful: namely, how to get out of it. • Stuart Jeffries is a feature writer
4||Tim Dowling: the day was going so well. Then I looked for my phoneEarly on Saturday morning, I head off to talk about myself at the Hexham book festival. There is an immediate hitch in my travel plans: the overground train that my phone recommends me to take doesn’t turn up, so I appeal to my phone again and, after a panicked sprint across the park, I manage to catch a bus that gets me to King’s Cross station with minutes to spare. A gratifying number of people come to hear me talk about myself in Hexham. Afterwards, I sign books in the foyer, while a local photographer moves my beer out of his shot. Two women approach, with a book between them. “We wonder what you’ll write about us next week!” one says. I smile, thinking: that’s not how it works. I explain that I never write about things going well. I tend to concentrate on personal failures and humiliations, which Hexham has singularly failed to furnish me with. “I suppose there’s still time for something bad to happen,” I say. But there isn’t: a taxi is already waiting for me outside. The whole trip has been, disappointingly, a triumph. As my train leaves Newcastle, I send my wife a text telling her that I’m on my way home. I’m sharing a carriage with a large group – perhaps 10 people, all mates. They have an amazing amount of alcohol with them and they’re already very jolly. I check Twitter. A picture of me signing books has already been posted, beer just out of frame. I check my email, then go back to Twitter again. I wake with a jolt as the train pulls into York. I realise that I’ve been asleep for almost an hour. In the meantime, the large group of friends has become even more voluble. Empty bottles and cans now litter their tables and seat-trays. I occupy myself by eavesdropping. It’s clear that they’ve just come from a Gateshead match, but I can’t figure out who they support; I don’t even know what league Gateshead play in, so I decide to look it up. I stare at my empty hand. I’m still a bit groggy from my sleep and it takes me a while to understand the problem: there is no phone in it. I check my pockets and the seat. I rummage through my coat pockets and my bag. Then I get down on all fours to look under the seats. I do all this two more times. Finally, I arrive at a difficult and humiliating conclusion: my phone has been snatched from my hand while I slept. The culprit, or culprits, may have got off at Darlington, or at York, or they may still be on this train. I begin to suspect – with no justification – that the large group has pinched my phone as a prank. Then I notice that the man across the aisle from me has two phones. Neither of them is mine, but still I think: what kind of person has two phones? A collector, that’s who. I don’t like to think of myself as phone-dependent, but withdrawal is swift and severe. I cannot address the problem of not having a phone without a phone. How do I determine its whereabouts? Who do I complain to? What league do Gateshead play in? Then I remember that I have my iPad with me. It’s old and the touchscreen is dead around the edges – I have to keep rotating it to type anything – but I manage to send an email to my wife explaining the situation before it dies. I settle down for a long, phoneless journey. When I get home and open our front door, I see my wife on her phone, wearing a coat. “Never mind, he’s just walked in,” she says. At that moment, I realise that my email may have been unclear – I might have made it sound as if I’d been robbed and left for dead. We are due to go out for dinner that night, and I have just enough time to check something on my computer before the taxi arrives. “I can’t believe anyone would steal such a shit phone,” my wife says as we pull off. “I know,” I say. “I think they may have done it to humiliate me. Or to celebrate Leyton’s 3-1 victory over Gateshead.” “What are you doing?” she says. I look down to see my left hand clamped around nothing, my thumb pushing imaginary buttons.
4||Blind date: ‘Neither of us was great at navigating fish bones’Aidan on Viccy What were you hoping for? A fun evening and a good story for my grandma to read in the paper. First impressions? Very pretty. What did you talk about? The pros and cons of living in London (we both miss being able to see the stars), and what else would be in the Weekend gardening special. Any awkward moments? A very drunk guy called Josh made a nuisance of himself once he realised we were on a blind date. Good table manners? Impeccable. She was very good at ensuring our glasses (of both water and wine) were kept topped up. Best thing about Viccy? She was great for conversation and a laugh. Would you introduce her to your friends? I’d be happy to. One of my best friends is a twin and Viccy is a triplet, so they could bond over that. Describe her in three words Vivacious, attractive, friendly. What do you think she made of you? She might have thought me geeky because I appeared on Countdown, was on my college University Challenge team and love pub quizzes. Did you go on somewhere? To a floating pub barge for a few more glasses of wine. I think we pretty much stayed until closing. And… did you kiss? A peck on the lips. Not a full-on snog yet! If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? I’d get rid of Josh. Marks out of 10? 9. Would you meet again? We exchanged numbers and are planning to. Viccy on Aidan What were you hoping for? To meet someone fun and engaging. First impressions? Slightly geeky (not a bad thing), friendly and sweet. What did you talk about? How lovely it is being outside and in nature. Any awkward moments? Some drunk guy tried to crash our date. Good table manners? Neither of us was great at navigating fish bones. Best thing about Aidan? He’s interesting and smart and a genuinely nice guy. Would you introduce him to your friends? Yeah, I reckon he’d get on with anyone. Describe him in three words Smart, friendly, interesting. What do you think he made of you? Loud and chatty; hopefully, not too drunk and annoying. Did you go on somewhere? To the dock nearby. And… did you kiss? No, I didn’t really get that vibe. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? I wouldn’t have had anything to drink beforehand. Marks out of 10? 7. Would you meet again? I think so. I’m not certain the chemistry was there, but I had a really nice evening. • Viccy and Aidan ate at the Garden Museum, London SE1 Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com
4||I loved the way Enid Blyton wrote about foodMy favourite Famous Five book is Five Run Away Together. The premise was wish-fulfilment for most children: the opportunity to self-govern on an island with no grownups. I loved the descriptions of Kirrin Island’s natural caves and the heather beds they made for themselves. But the thing I loved most was the way Enid Blyton wrote about food. With hindsight, they are mostly revolting pairings: at one point the children consume a breakfast of “tongue, tinned peaches, bread and butter, golden syrup and ginger beer”. Blyton describes it as a “fine” meal. Objectively, we know this is a lie. And yet, when I closed my eyes, I could taste those peaches. Reading about food holds a unique pleasure. There’s an invisible contract between writer and reader: the former is trying to paint a picture using known colours and textures, while leaving room for the reader’s own interpretations. In the most sensual food book I’ve read, Like Water For Chocolate, Laura Esquivel names her chapters after a month and includes a recipe. In March, her heroine Tita makes quail in rose petal sauce. When I read it, I hadn’t even imagined roses were edible; afterwards, they were all I wanted to eat. Recently, I had a meal so astonishingly good, I dreamed about it that night: smoky mushroom toast, bitter and cleansing radicchio with olives and parmesan, roast cauliflower with lemon aïoli, grilled sea bass, hanger steak with smoked tomato butter and beets, and perhaps the crispiest duck confit in the world. The chef and his restaurateur wife, old friends of a new friend, clinked glasses with us as we tucked into a pot de crème. Outside, rain fell softly. It felt like a scene in a book I needed to write.
3||Facing extinction, the North Atlantic right whale cannot adapt. Can we?As if to confound everyone, this past week Dr Charles “Stormy” Mayo and his team from the Provincetown Center for Coastal Studies reported seeing up to 150 right whales in Cape Cod Bay. Dr Mayo – who has been studying these animals for 40 years and has a scientist’s aversion to exaggeration – is stunned. “It is amazing for such a rare and utterly odd creature,” he tells me. All the more amazing since he knows this great gathering could be a final flourish. By 2040, the North Atlantic right whale may be gone. He hesitates, then uses the e-word: extinction. How can such a huge mammal simply disappear within reach of the richest and most powerful nation on earth? Shifting food sources – due to climate change – are leading whales to areas where maritime industries are unused to them. In the past 12 months, 18 rights have died after ship strikes or entanglement in fishing gear. With as few as 430 animals left, 100 of them breeding females in a reduced gene pool, the species is unsustainable. The right whale may be the strangest beast in the ocean. Vast and rotund, its gigantic mouth is fringed with two-metre strips of baleen, once “harvested” by humans to furnish Venetian blinds and corset stays but used by the whale to strain its diet of rice-sized zooplankton from the sea. These bizarre animals are not easily known or imagined. They live far longer than us – like its Arctic cousin, the bowhead, the right whale may reach 200, perhaps more. Individuals could be older than constitutional America. They exist beyond us in time, dimension and experience. If we lose the right whale, we lose part of our planet’s biological history. If any whale were to be so foolish as to claim nationality, the North Atlantic right whale would be American, spending all its life in US or Canadian waters. Its modern nickname, the urban whale, evokes its habit of foraging close to shore. Its historic name speaks to its fate. Being a surface-feeder, so near to land, made it vulnerable to humans. And when it was killed, its belt of blubber ensured that it floated conveniently. The right whale was in the wrong place, at the wrong time. By 1935, with as few as 60 breeding individuals left, the situation was so dire that the right whale became the first cetacean to be protected by law. But by the start of this century, the numbers seemed to recover. Shipping lanes were shifted and fishing industries took on board the whale’s protected status. It even got its own air exclusion zone. “Like a Hollywood star,” as John Waters quipped to me. For 18 years I’ve followed that tentative recovery in the waters off Cape Cod. I’ve stumbled on to the winter beach to witness their fins and flukes tumbling so near the tide line I might have waded out to them. I’ve even watched them from my bed overlooking the bay. And on research cruises with the Center for Coastal Studies, special licence allowed us to approach close enough to see the whale lice (cyamids) crawling round their heads. On one memorable trip in April 2015, scientist Christy Hudak and her team spotted 80 animals – almost 20% of the population. It was like watching dinosaurs, but such is the sensitivity of the center’s work that I cannot show you the dozens of photographs I took that day. That sense of a huge animal being and not being there speaks to a paradoxical fragility. Veteran whalewatch naturalist Dennis Minsky, based in Provincetown, takes this story personally: “An ancient and noble beast is constitutionally unable to adapt to an array of anthropogenic threats – speeding water craft, the myriad vertical lines of fishing gear, an increasingly noisy ocean and poorly understood changes in water quality.” Federal and state efforts to help seem little more than “mere tinkering”. And with 80% of right whales showing scars from entanglement, what about their individual suffering? “The lucky ones, I suppose, drown,” Minsky says. “Others go for months or even years, dying an excruciating death.” Minsky shrugs, summing up the situation in five pithy words: “They cannot adapt: can we?” Like Minsky and Mayo, I feel an intimate connection to the whales of the Cape, a place I hymn in my new book. This is the edge of our world, where we meet the other. As I swim in its waters, winter and summer, I find it hard to see this as a site of mortality rather than life. What could save its most enigmatic, sensate and sentient animal? New fishing gear technology, tighter regulations? Maybe. But out there, swimming under the blue expanse that Melville called “the ocean’s skin”, Eubalaena glacialis needs one thing more than anything else. Our empathy. Just for a moment, can we stop thinking human, and start thinking whale? Philip Hoare’s RISINGTIDEFALLINGSTAR is published in the US by University of Chicago Press. An exhibition based on the themes of the book opens at the Merola Gallery, Provincetown, on 25 May
3||You can find utopia in India – if you’re willing to close your eyesThe adjective “sleepy” is still sometimes applied to Pondicherry, the former French colony on the south-east coast of India, but of course this is nonsense. Nowhere in India is sleepy, and Pondicherry is about as sleepy as a bank holiday in Brighton. Thousands of families stroll up and down its promenade, the Avenue Goubert, on a Sunday evening, and the crowd is only a little sparser at dawn the following morning, when men and women of all shapes and ages take advantage of the coolest hours of daylight to walk purposefully – or even jog – beside the sea as the sun rises out of it. The chaat, pizza slices and corncobs of the night before have been replaced by water bottles as the consumables to be held in the hand. Purging has followed feasting; austerity has replaced indulgence; but the promenade is hardly less full. On a visit last month, I decided that my own morning walk would take a different route. Rather than marching both ways along the prom, so that I twice passed the little Place de la République and the startling white memorial to the “combattants des Indes françaises” who died in the first world war, I would return to my hotel via the inland, acacia-lined streets of the old French quarter, and there escape the crowd and find some shade; by 8am it was already close to 30C. The streets – the Rue François Martin, the Rue Saint Louis – were reasonably empty on the first two mornings. Across one of them, a couple of girls in Islamic dress played badminton. But on the third morning they were as busy as the promenade. Flocks of slender people in loose cotton clothes rode past on their bicycles or loped along in their sandals, and in one place sat cross-legged in rows that stretched from pavement to pavement: a crowd awaiting benediction and food. “Place your shoes over there,” said a steward, indicating a pile of them discarded by their owners. Eventually it became clear. This was a special day at the Sri Aurobindo ashram, which has been a prominent part of Pondicherry’s life for nearly a century, and the reason that people other than students of French colonial history have ever heard of the place. According to another steward, supervising the queue for the meal tickets, the morning’s rituals celebrated the day the Mother arrived in the town for the first time. The year was 1914, and the woman in question was a 36-year-old member of the Paris bourgeoisie, Mirra Alfassa. She had a Turkish-Jewish father and an Egyptian-Jewish mother, and she sailed to Pondicherry with a French husband (her second) in pursuit of the occult – in particular the Bengali yogi and Indian nationalist Sri Aurobindo, who had moved to the colony, partly to escape the attention of the British Raj’s police. It was Aurobindo who called Alfassa the Mother. In the world of the occult, their encounter ranks with Rolls meeting Royce, or Laurel bumping into Hardy: a historic moment that produced a famous partnership and, in their case, a brand of spiritual thought that has attracted followers ever since. It was an enduring version of what the west liked to think of as the mysterious east – high-minded and not at all threatening. Aurobindo wore Indian dress, a beard and long hair, but his education had included St Paul’s school in London and King’s College, Cambridge. Their ashram attracted famous followers and influential friends. The eldest daughter of the US president Woodrow Wilson spent her last six years there. India’s first and third prime ministers – Jawaharlal Nehru and his daughter, Indira Gandhi – made several approving visits. But, beyond the beneficial effects of yoga and a vegetarian diet, the movement’s beliefs are hard to describe. The Mother’s collected works run to 15 volumes. In Pondicherry I bought a brief anthology, The Mother on Herself, which announced some of her creed (“I belong to no nation, no civilisation, no society, no race, but to the Divine’’) as well as her aim “to establish an ideal society in a propitious spot for the flowering of the new race, the race of the Sons of God”. She had a religious tendency towards the initial capital – Truth, Harmony, Light, Love – and a belief in an all-powerful Supermind. She wasn’t modest. She disclosed that her “complete identification” as the Universal Mother had taken place in 1914. In the same year, her intervention with the goddess Kali had prevented the German army’s capture of Paris. Later, 15 years before her death in 1973, a new realism seemed to have set in. She wrote: “It will be said of me: ‘She was ambitious, she wanted to transform the world.’ But the world does not want to be transformed except by a very long and slow process, so slow that the change cannot be perceptible from one generation to the other.” The truer thing would be to say that the world, in her lifetime and the years since, has shown no inclination to be transformed in the way she and many others wanted, in terms of restricted human appetites and the reformed human soul. In most other ways, it has changed utterly. When the Mother died, India’s population was just under 600 million; this year it will reach roughly 1.35 billion, and by 2024 is expected to overtake China as the world’s most populous country. A visitor to Pondicherry 40 years ago would have seen half the number of people, perhaps many fewer, on his or her walk along the promenade; an expanding, prospering middle class can now afford more trips to the seaside. And of course, the seaside itself has changed: who could have imagined even 20 years ago the flotsam of plastic bottles, straws and bags that would float in with each tide? Plastic waste is now a ubiquitous feature of the Indian landscape – the lining to every roadside, the shimmering surface of every garbage dump, the floater in every open drain. And there it was as usual, tangled in the verges and ditches of the lanes that lead to the Mother’s most extraordinary creation, the “international-universal” settlement of Auroville, which lies a 20-minute taxi journey outside the town. Auroville was founded in 1968 as a sort of utopia: 2,250 acres of fields and scrubland with enough room for a population of 50,000, though so far only a 20th of that number have made a home there. It has cycle paths, solar kitchens, reforestation schemes, water-pumping windmills and two museums, and has attracted the support of several international organisations, including Unesco. Its most celebrated feature is a giant golden orb called the Matrimandir, the Temple of the Mother, which sits in the middle of a geometric pattern of lawns like an expensive but rather vulgar gift from another galaxy. I walked a kilometre to the temple down a parched red-earth path from the visitor centre. It was very hot, and I was glad to take the bus back and sit in one of Auroville’s cafes under a fan and have coffee with a nice slice of walnut cake. Next door, a shop sold scarves, hats, soaps and other tasteful souvenirs. Garden servants raked leaves from the grass. Not a scrap of plastic could be seen. Was that Alan Bennett under his sunhat? I might have been enjoying an afternoon with the National Trust. How odd to sit there, in this little Wiltshire in the east, and think how much more useful it was to gather up plastic, or abandon its production in the first place, than to try to achieve universal Harmony and penetrate the secrets of the Supermind. • Ian Jack is a Guardian columnist
3||Without the Nobel prize for literature, we’ll have no spark amid 2018’s gloomHow many experts does it take to honour a genius? More than 10, the Swedish academy that awards the Nobel prize for literature has decided, after a scandal linked to the handling of sexual abuse allegations led to resignations, leaving the 18-strong panel eight members short. This year, it was announced on Friday, there will be no Nobel laureate to follow in the footsteps of TS Eliot, Jean-Paul Sartre and Toni Morrison (and not nearly enough other women). That this will have a dulling and depressing effect on 2018 is a no-brainer to anyone who thinks the prize serves a purpose. The Nobel, awarded to the author judged to have created “the most outstanding work in an ideal direction”, is a celebration of cleverness and goodness. Last year’s win by the Japanese-born British novelist Kazuo Ishiguro, author of the magnificent The Remains of the Day among many other fine and interesting books, was a bright spark in a gloomy year. The previous year’s winner, Bob Dylan, offered diversion of a different sort when it appeared that the musician, rewarded for his lyrics, might not want the medal, and sent Patti Smith to the ceremony in his place. He subsequently relented, attending a reception in Stockholm and delivering a recorded lecture reflecting on influences from Buddy Holly to Homer. But perhaps what the academy’s permanent secretary, Sara Danius, called its “Dylan adventure” was an unhelpful distraction from urgent business at home. Danius’s resignation from her post last month, and public protests against this, were the culmination of a crisis that had been building for months, after allegations by 18 women against the French-Swedish photographer Jean-Claude Arnault were published in a newspaper. Arnault is married to an academy member and Swedish cultural grandee, the poet Katarina Frostenson, and the pair ran an arts club in Stockholm that was funded by the academy until it closed after the scandal broke last year. Last month Frostenson resigned from the academy. Arnaud denies all the allegations against him. Carl-Henrik Heldin, the chairman of the Nobel Foundation, says safeguarding the “long-term reputation” of the academy is now the priority. In this gap year it will modernise, become more open, and find a way to fill all those empty seats. The plan is that next year it will for the second time in its history award two prizes instead of one, so that a writer who might otherwise have won in 2018 does not miss out. This could charitably be described as making the best of a bad lot, but it is still a colossal pity. Two authors sharing the limelight will naturally have less of it; no one gets the chance to shine this year; and the whole world misses out on one of the year’s biggest literary stories. Shame on the Swedish academy for getting itself into such a shocking mess. It had one job. • Susanna Rustin is a Guardian writer and editor
25||Country diary: a rock saga played out on the sea frontOut on the headland at Barns Ness, the strand is pitted with rockpools and slung with seaweed of all textures. Bladderwrack and fleecy gutweed and long-tailed oarweed and sugar kelp lie heaped upon one another, slick and slippery underfoot. The pools themselves seem empty on first approach, but after a minute’s silent watch they come to life: periwinkles inching almost imperceptibly along, shore crabs sidling from under rocks with a suspicious air, and – best of all – tiny hermit crabs in their pilfered shells, peeking shyly out, antennae waving. We have spent a week here in the lighthouse cottages in Barns Ness, waking to the sound of crashing waves beyond the wall. The weather has been temperamental, so when the sun appears we rush out the door and down to the shoreline. Today the clouds are strung high and thin in the sky, and the sun casts a great halo around itself – a ring of light that encircles the lighthouse too, and the peregrine falcon that perches on its rail. Further down, towards the beach at White Sands, it is the rocks that demand attention. A layer of limestone appears polka-dotted and busy with detail: a colony of coral turned to stone. In places, they stand proud from the rock – perfect, tiny, cornucopic. Where the rock has worn away they are displayed in delicate cross-section, like botanical diagrams. There are two types of fossils here: “body fossils” like these, where the creatures themselves have been preserved, and “trace fossils”, which are the fingerprint swirls of burrows laced through what was once soft soil Limpets cling on in the puckers and creases of the rock, oystercatchers haunt the surf’s edge; the whole place feels dense with life, old and new. But later, when the wind has changed, the haar sweeps in from the sea. The air is saline, vaporous. Feeling vulnerable, we eschew the rocks for the safe route over the dunes. Cresting the bank, we find the way ahead bright and white and featureless – we are nowhere, walking into nothing. Degree by degree a shape arises, a column takes form in the air. Who knew we’d need a lighthouse to navigate the land?
19||Alexis Okeowo on appropriation in writing: ‘It’s time for another reckoning'In literature, the topic of appropriation has been constantly debated, turned over and debated again. But in journalism, it’s an undisputed given. As a reporter, it’s your job to tell the stories of people often radically different from you, and to assume the voice of authority, of knowingness, of supposed objectivity. But as with most things, the roots of what we as journalists do are problematic. I’ve been a foreign correspondent for most of my career. When I first began working in east Africa, in Uganda, right out of college, people – other correspondents, my subjects – were always surprised I was there to report, since I was the only black woman in the press corps who wasn’t Ugandan. That’s partly because foreign correspondence began as a colonial enterprise, explaining the so-called others to the so-called us, and women of colour were always the subjects, never the storytellers. • Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon In places like the United States, there’s a renewed interest in reporting on communities that have been previously unexplored in depth: racial, ethnic or religious groups living on the margins, poor people, immigrants, rural people. But there’s still an uneasy framing of the unbalanced power dynamic between a journalist and her subject. There are few phrases I cringe at more than “giving voice” or “bearing witness”, as if journalists are Christopher Columbus on his ship heroically “discovering” America. Even if they are off the radar of the west or of mainstream America, these places have their own agency, and our showing up to document what is going on is not the first time the people there have grappled with the issues affecting them. Yet reporters are too often regarded as immediate experts or, worse, saviours. Subjects from marginalised communities are too often seen as passive, people whom things happen to or flattened, devoid of nuance. But whether we’re talking about the supposed constant bleakness of the Central African Republic, as Nick Kristof recently did in the New York Times, or the seemingly all-white, working-class residents of small-town America, as so many reporters did during the last US presidential election, that frame is often far from the truth. And so I think it’s time for another reckoning over how to write about those less powerful, those with less currency – about how we do our work, about what we consider right and wrong when it comes to the ways in which we do it, and what we owe to the people whose stories we take. What if we thought of our work partly as a way to justify why we have the privilege of appropriating someone else’s story in the first place, a way to prove our worthiness as the storyteller? Which would then lead us to ask how we can respect, dignify and do justice to a voice, to a life. Which would then probably lead us to wonder sometimes if we are the right person to tell a story at all, or if someone else could do it better. What would some possible differences look like in practice? Well, what about not being allowed to write a story about a place or a community without consulting and quoting analysts and observers from that very place or community? Throughout my career, I’ve always wondered why the most-quoted experts on Africa seem to be based in southern California. You would think there were no universities and thinktanks on the entire continent. Another simple standard we could use: being available to engage with feedback after the story runs, recognising that especially when we write longform stories and books, and take so much from our subjects, we owe something to them: not only transparency but also accountability. And what I think is the most needed shift: recognising, accepting that your perspective is not the only one capable of objectivity – that there are many objective truths, and race, nationality, religion and gender don’t indicate any more bias or any greater subjectivity than what you hold. For so long, being white and male was regarded as the ultimate objective, authoritative perspective – but from the #MeToo reckoning, when we discovered some of the white men narrating the American story were guilty of serial abuses against women, to flawed reporting on US police brutality, where reporters have cast moral judgement on black victims, we know that this is not true. In the American south, where I am spending time reporting [for] my next book, I am again interacting with communities on the margins, poor people, rural people, anti-government people. And even though I am from this place, I am still an interloper of sorts, one who will have to constantly wrestle with my own preconceived notions and to try to not lose sight of my subjects’ humanity and complexities. People down there are, at this point, wary of outsiders, wary of the media, wary of an authority that claims to care about them; they feel powerless, in other words. I can’t say that I blame them. The deep south is a place that we’re still allowed to get wrong, to paint in broad strokes and to rely on oversimplified terms like “Trump country”. I know that because I grew up there, but it’s also our job as writers to figure out the many sides to a place by digging deeper, spending more time and getting it right. I suppose that I think about all this a lot because I am, at my core, a descendant of traumatised colonial subjects. And the trauma lives on. In Uganda, I straddled the line of being a foreigner, a foreign correspondent but also being black, being African and in some crucial ways more similar to the natives than my fellow journalists. I was never fully comfortable. But we should never be fully comfortable, we should always feel a little ill at ease, because it means we’re still wrestling with the uneasiness of what we do. For me, that meant constantly being aware that, but for the grace of fate, I would be the subject, the constantly observed and often misunderstood, a woman in my mother’s native Delta state, or in Lagos, my father’s hometown, being described and dissected by the curious foreign writer. Maybe I would be a journalist, too, but, still, to the west, always a subject. How do we learn new ways of being and interacting in the world and unlearn old ways? We have to keep each other accountable, even if it’s awkward or uncomfortable. I want us to take stands: say no to exploitative assignments, refuse to work for publications that don’t prioritise telling nuanced stories of marginalised people and places, or that don’t employ writers and editors from those same backgrounds. That could be one way to use our power responsibly and ethically. To take care and be mindful that our own position as storyteller could be reversed but for the grace of circumstance. • Alexis Okeowo is discussing her most recent book, A Moonless, Starless Sky, at the Sydney writers’ festival on Sunday, 6 May
12||Strong case to boost Newstart but politicians are up to their old gamesLet’s be clear about what the Turnbull government wants. Internal intrigues notwithstanding – Peter Dutton’s inclination to spread his wings and Julie Bishop’s equal and opposite inclination to clip them – the objective of the next couple of months is plotting a path to political recovery. The aim is to set some bedrock, then begin to claw back lost ground. In that environment, pesky strictures such as fiscal rules are so yesterday. While the government is behind in the polls, and on its worst days can barely mask its internal ambitions and animosities, over on the Labor side there is concern the political contest has tightened in recent months. Sign up to receive the latest Australian opinion pieces every weekday There is an instinct that what happens over the next two or three months will determine the outcome of the next federal election. So what we see right now is a bunch of politicians very focused on short-term imperatives. Of course portfolio work is going on, and doggedly in some cases, but all eyes are also on the politics, and specifically the politics of the second half of 2018. Not for the first time, the long game is hostage to the short one. While it’s always very unwise as a commentator to suggest you know the character of a budget you haven’t yet seen, this one feels simple, and deliberately so. The focal points of next Tuesday would seem to be income-tax cuts, infrastructure spending, and bits and pieces, including in health and aged care. It feels like a “please like me” budget. But lost in the “please like me” mix, though, is one glaring policy item requiring attention. There is no indication from the government that the Newstart payment will be increased next week. Perhaps we’ll get a surprise next Tuesday – one can be ever hopeful – but right now, it doesn’t look like it. Just some basic facts to orient us in the debate. The maximum Newstart payment is currently $272.90 a week for a single unemployed person without children. For singles with a dependent child or children it’s $295.20. Just to plot another point in a mental graph, the national minimum wage is currently $694.90 a week. If you’ve been around long enough, you’ll know we’ve been running around in circles on this issue for at least a decade: a seemingly unending cycle of expert reports, ignored by politicians, followed by people saying stupid things, followed by people trying to counter the stupid things that get said. Back in 2012, we learned that governments had been sitting on advice since 2009 that there were growing discrepancies between unemployment benefits and other government allowances because of the different methods by which the payments get topped up. Also in 2009, the Henry review of taxation recommended the benefit be increased by about $50 per week. It’s probably not necessary to remind anyone it’s now 2018, right? To call the lack of action on dealing with Newstart a disgrace and a failure of the system doesn’t even begin to cut it. Boosting the payment isn’t about some bleeding heart agenda, about ensuring that every benefit recipient has a lollypop and a pony and a shoulder rub – it’s about being rational. Despite various politicians declaring blithely at various times that they could live on $40 per day, that’s just crap. I know there are people in Australia who resent other people for claiming benefits, egged on by governments who like to prosecute policy debates in this area by following the time-honoured methodology of the page one welfare cheat smash-up in the Daily Telegraph. If you are one of these folks discomfited by the idea of your fellow citizens on welfare, my presumption is you’d like them to get a job. I reckon it’s pretty self-evident that would be a positive development for the benefit recipients and the economy. But imagine trying to get a job interview when you can’t afford credit for your mobile phone, or presentable clothes to wear for a conversation with the prospective boss, or petrol to get yourself across town, and when you lack the networks to overcome your disadvantage. The poverty trap is obvious. The low rate of the allowance becomes a tangible factor in whether or not you can successfully find work. This has been the core of the business and economic case for boosting Newstart, articulated very clearly by a range of players in recent years, and as recently as this week, by the respected economist Chris Richardson, who noted the payment had failed to keep up with national living standards for more than a quarter of a century. As well as the payment working against the capacity of recipients to find work, there’s another hard-headed argument in favour of a top-up at a time when incomes are being squeezed by low wages growth and the rising cost of living – there would be a modest boost to consumption if the payment went up, which would be beneficial to the economy. If you think about it for all of two seconds, the case really is compelling. The government will tell us next week there is sufficient revenue to bake in income-tax cuts and lower tax rates for big companies, citing the little known economic theory known as better out than in. If the government’s own logic holds, it’s a bit hard to comprehend why a boost to Newstart doesn’t qualify for the same attention, except of course, if you think there’s no votes in it. Again, we can all cross our fingers for a budget miracle. But the Turnbull government has thus far rejected calls to increase the payment on the rationale that it doesn’t want to encourage people to be content with the stipend and stop looking for work, and also on the basis that Newstart recipients get other forms of income support. The argument from a succession of social services ministers has been that things aren’t really as dire as the bleeding hearts of the welfare lobby would like to suggest, which strands the conversation firmly in pantomime mode, and conveniently avoids engaging with the expertise in the social services sector and the broad-based coalition in favour of change. Labor makes the right noises, but thus far has avoided making any concrete commitments. Now why would that be? Well, the main reason is that boosting Newstart (depending on how much it was increased by, and whether it was also then subjected to regular adjustments) would cost the budget about $3bn a year. That’s a big whack of cash at a time when Labor wants to reserve fiscal room to offer voters its own version of the income-tax cuts the Coalition will bowl up next week. If it has to account for a particular Newstart increase, its room to move narrows. What were we saying again about the short term and the long term? – Katharine Murphy is Guardian Australia’s political editor
12||Quiz: how much do you know about surviving on Newstart?
12||Australian budget 2018: what to expect from Scott MorrisonThe Turnbull government is shifting itself on to a pre-election footing, declaring that next week’s budget will demonstrate the Coalition’s economic plan is working and also highlight the risks of a change to a Labor government. The treasurer, Scott Morrison, and the finance minister, Mathias Cormann, have emphasised that message before next week’s economic statement, which is expected to deliver income-tax cuts, a significant infrastructure spend, and investments in aged care and health, including a modest rise in the Medicare levy for GP visits. Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon Following on from a decision last month to dump an $8bn increase in the Medicare levy that was supposed to help fund the national disability insurance scheme, there is also speculation the government will use the budget to ditch a decision to scrap an energy supplement implemented at the time Labor legislated the carbon price. Cormann made it clear on Friday the government would persist in trying to land its politically unpopular tax cut for big business, despite the complications posed by damaging revelations in the banking royal commission. Tax measures The centrepiece of next Tuesday’s budget is expected to be personal income-tax cuts, with speculative reports saying these will be spread over 10 years with a modest start. Labor has already indicated it will offer voters something similar by way of tax relief. Australia’s resources groups expect the Coalition will – apart from keeping the proposed tax cuts for big companies despite the lack of parliamentary support – use the budget to adjust the uplift rate of the Petroleum Resources Rent Tax – a shift that could affect deductions that gas companies can carry forward. The government has also confirmed it will change the rules so that all beer kegs larger than eight litres will be taxed at the same rate, a decision costing the budget $85m over the forward estimates. Large beer producers have previously enjoyed more advantageous tax treatment than craft brewers. On Friday, Morrison could not guarantee the price of craft beer would decrease as a result of the change, but he said he was “taking the tax monkey off the brewer’s back and the distiller’s back all around the country because I want to see those businesses grow”. Infrastructure In the countdown to the budget, there has been a debate inside the government about winding back current levels of migration on the basis that Australia’s big cities are too congested, and infrastructure is not keeping pace. The prime minister and the treasurer have been resisting calls to cut the immigration rate, and have stepped up the public focus on infrastructure projects, including $5bn to help construct the long-awaited rail link from Melbourne’s Tullamarine rail link to the city. In the run-up to Tuesday night’s budget, Malcolm Turnbull has unveiled a $3.2bn infrastructure package for Western Australia, where the Coalition has been in trouble politically. It includes $1.67bn for road projects, an extra $1.05bn for Metronet, $189m for hospital infrastructure and $140m for a water project. With Queensland being critical to the government’s electoral fortunes federally, given the swag of marginal seats in the state, there has also been a Queensland package, including $800m for a rail upgrade on the Sunshine Coast, and $1bn for an upgrade of the M1 motorway on the Gold Coast. As well as road and rail investments, on Friday, the government confirmed that $140m would be set aside from 2019-20 for a location incentive to attract blockbuster films for production in facilities on the Gold Cast. The proposal will increase the location offset rate from 16.5% to 30% for eligible large budget international productions that film in Australia from 1 July 2018. The government also committed $155m this week for a four-lane bridge over the Shoalhaven river at Nowra, in the marginal seat of Gilmore in New South Wales. The Liberals hold that seat with a wafer-thin margin of 0.73%. Aged care The budget is expected to confirm $100bn for aged care over five years, with a focus on 103,000 people on the waiting list for in-house care, increased focus on training to build the aged care workforce, and improvements to how services are accessed. In health, a report in the Daily Telegraph suggests the Medicare rebate for GP visits will go up by 55 cents per visit from July 1, ending a four-year freeze – but there will also be cuts to some services. Rivers of revenue ‘gold’ and return to surplus With the economy finally turning a corner, Morrison used a speech delivered in late April to confirm the 2018 budget would benefit from stronger than expected revenue collections. He noted that tax receipts until February were running $4.8bn higher than forecast by the Treasury last December, including a $1.2bn boost to income-tax receipts and a $3bn increase on company tax. “Our economy is finally shaking off the dulling effects of the downturn in the mining investment boom,” he said. The respected forecaster Chris Richardson predicts that revenue in 2017-18 will beat the official forecasts by $7.6bn and in 2018-19 by $6.7bn. This improvement translates to underlying cash deficits of $16.6bn in 2017-18 and $13.3bn in 2018-19. While there has been speculation that the budget may include an earlier return to surplus than the forecast time of 2020-21 despite the big outlay on personal tax cuts – Morrison has refused to guarantee that the government will run budget surpluses of at least 1% of GDP, which has been the Coalition’s previous commitment.
13||José Mourinho blames loss at Brighton on Manchester United bit-part playersJosé Mourinho has pointed to the disjointed displays offered by Marcus Rashford and Anthony Martial as justification for their bit-part roles this season after Brighton secured a first win over Manchester United since 1982 to confirm top flight survival. Neither Romelu Lukaku nor Alexis Sánchez was fit to feature at the Amex Stadium but Rashford and Martial laboured against Albion, with only David de Gea of the visitors impressing in a mess of a performance. The defeat left the manager questioning whether his players were as desperate as he is to secure a top-two finish. “It was not good enough,” said Mourinho, who had made six changes to his lineup and asked those selected to impress before the FA Cup final. “The players who replaced others did not perform at a good level and, when individuals do that, it is difficult for the team to play well. “Maybe now you will not ask me why A, B and C do not play so much. People always ask: ‘Why always Lukaku?’ Well, now they know why always Lukaku, and why always this player and why always that player. We are probably not as good as people think we are individually. “I knew what was going to happen, and I told them, but that is what we got. Brighton had one target, to get the point and celebrate their Premier League survival. Our target was to get points to help us finish second and they clearly showed that, for them, it is more important for them to stay in the Premier League than for us to finish second. They showed it from the first minute and we didn’t show that. We were not able to motivate ourselves.” Mourinho added: “For me that’s always disappointing because that’s not me. And if my players want to be honest and fair, which I think they want ... if you ask them they will tell you how long I spoke ... during the week, trying to anticipate the scenario and trying to persuade them that the only way to compete against a team like Brighton is to have the same commitment and ambition they have. “We were not ready to prove that second position is important for us. I am disappointed because second is important for me. I’m not sure every one of my players is disappointed.”
13||Women’s FA Cup final: Arsenal out to show they are back against ChelseaBy the time the final whistle approaches, the evening sun will have dipped, casting long shadows across Wembley’s wide expanses. As the television cameras zoom in to capture the starkly contrasting emotions of winners and losers, the answers to a series of questions should become clear. Will Arsenal’s renaissance under their Australian coach, Joe Montemurro, result in a 15th FA Cup win? Or might his Chelsea counterpart, Emma Hayes, clinch the first part of the domestic league and cup double she aims to secure before giving birth to twins next month? Can Katie Chapman, Chelsea’s captain, lift the trophy for a record 10th time in a 21-year career during which time she has produced three children? If so, Chapman will need to hold her own in a duel with Arsenal’s England midfielder Jordan Nobbs. Chelsea’s Fran Kirby wants to remind everyone why she has scored 22 goals in 31 games this season while also collecting virtually every individual award going. Wembley seems the perfect stage for her to showcase the talent that has led the forward, who as a teenager overcame severe depression, to be dubbed England’s mini-Messi. “We can rely on Fran, she’s world-class,” says Chelsea’s England goalkeeper Carly Telford, who hopes to oust the regular first choice, Sweden’s outstanding Hedvig Lindahl, on Saturday. “She’s brilliant at playing between the lines.” Montemurro, a clean-sheet specialist, aims to fulfil a hope nurtured by cheering on Arsenal men while watching two-week-old editions of Match of the Day and The Big Match during his childhood in Melbourne’s northern suburbs. An anticipated record attendance for a women’s FA Cup final will gather beneath the forecasted strong May sun to see whether the 48-year-old can outwit Hayes and collect his second trophy since taking charge last autumn after Arsenal controversially sacked Pedro Martínez Losa. “After a difficult few years when we lost our way a bit we’d like to show everyone that it’s not all about Chelsea and Manchester City,” Nobbs says. “We want to show Arsenal are back and ready to really challenge again.” Once imperious in their domination of the women’s game, they have fallen behind Chelsea and City, who are once again vying for the title but Montemurro has tightened Arsenal’s defence appreciably and his side have beaten City to win the Continental Cup. “Before Joe arrived, our team wasn’t all on the same page,” Nobbs says. “Players were performing as individuals but he’s taken us back to basics, made things very simple and created a strong framework in which we can develop our passing game and play the Arsenal way. “He’s a lovely, really positive, guy and he’s allowed me to focus on the more attacking, creative role where I feel I’m at my best.” Whereas Montemurro describes the prospect of leading out Arsenal at Wembley as surreal and fantastic, Hayes will sit things out on the sidelines, leaving her assistant, Paul Green, to do the honours. Eight months pregnant, the 41-year-old knows her limits. “Physically, it’s uncomfortable and I’ve been advised to take it easy so I’ll stay in the background,” she says. “It’s better for my babies if I sit down. I don’t mind. I’m a woman. I don’t have a big ego.” Telford is impressed how Hayes manages the assorted egos in a highly competitive Chelsea squad. “As others have said, I’m sure Emma could do very well at a high level in the men’s game,” she says. “But I think Emma’s happy in women’s football. She realises its fantastic potential in England.” Hayes also knows responsibility can be safely delegated to Chapman. Now 35, Chapman first won the FA Cup as a 14-year-old at Millwall. “I’m excited,” says the former England midfielder, whose side will want to banish the disappointment of last Sunday’s Champions League semi-final defeat by Wolfsburg by winning their second FA Cup. “Lifting the trophy again would be wonderful.” With more than 45,000 tickets sold and the match televised live at primetime on BBC One for the first time, Chapman would do so in a spotlight brighter than ever before. If the crowd should exceed the record 35,271 who watched Manchester City overcome Bimingham in last year’s final – a far cry from the disappointing 4,998 gathered at Doncaster’s Keepmoat Stadium when Arsenal beat Bristol Academy in 2013 – soaring interest in women’s football has brought increased scrutiny, not all of it entirely welcome. Behind closed doors, the wounds inflicted by Mark Sampson’s sacking as England manager last autumn after Eni Aluko’s well-documented complaints still fester. Aluko, an infrequent Chelsea starter this season, is likely to be a substitute. With her contract ending this summer, the future remains uncertain for a striker no longer on speaking terms with several former England team-mates and so far overlooked by Phil Neville, Sampson’s successor. At 31, this could be Aluko’s Wembley swansong. Might a figure who polarises opinion like no other in the female game step off the bench to goalscoring effect? Nobbs trusts it will be Arsenal’s day, with England’s Beth Mead, Montemurro’s leading scorer, or the Dutch striker Vivianne Miedema possibly registering the winner. “We’ve got a lot of experience,” she says, pointing out that Sari van Veenendaal, Danielle van de Donk and Dominque Janssen featured, like Miedema, in the Netherlands Euro 2017 triumph. “Joe’s made sure our mentality’s strong,” Nobbs says. “Winning the FA Cup would be the perfect way to prove we’re all back on the same page.” • This article was amended on 10 May 2018. Due to a miscommunication from the BBC’s press office, an earlier version said this would be the first women’s FA cup final broadcast live on BBC One. It was the first broadcast at primetime on that channel.
0||Talking Horses: Gustav Klimt can bag Guineas for master trainer O’BrienThe abrupt emergence of Masar as a potential Classic winner gives the 2,000 Guineas today at Newmarket a familiar Godolphin versus Ballydoyle look, but one of the more open renewals of recent years has several more genuine contenders in the field. Expert Eye and Elarqam have serious claims on the pick of their juvenile form, while James Garfield beat Expert Eye in the Greenham and will have his backers with Frankie Dettori taking the reins. There is also market confidence behind Mark Johnston’s Elarqam, which has not been the case for Saxon Warrior, one of Aidan O’Brien’s two main contenders. O’Brien’s Gustav Klimt (3.35), though, looks very solid at the top of the betting. He did not post a wide-margin win to compare with Masar’s on his seasonal debut but Gustav Klimt was, in his way, just as impressive, as he quickened well on testing ground. He somehow plucked victory from defeat in last season’s Superlative Stakes too, and has the class and turn of foot to give O’Brien his ninth 2,000 Guineas winner. Newmarket 1.50 Dommersen is an intriguing runner for John Gosden and Dettori. This will be just his ninth start at the age of five, but he has looked to have plenty of talent on several of his trips to the track and seems sure to improve for his first start in 574 days at Kempton in March. Goodwood 2.05 Architecture finished second to Minding in the 2016 Oaks but failed to win in three starts last year. Mori’s form also tailed off a little last year, but she has had a wind op over the winter and could be set for a productive season. Newmarket 2.20 Mabs Cross has the benefit of a run when she looked a little unlucky in Listed company at Bath and that may give her the edge over Judicial and the admirable Havana Grey. Goodwood 2.40 Johnston has a strong hand here and Masham Star, third in a Listed event at Wolverhampton in March, has picked up useful draw for a front-runner in stall one. Newmarket 2.55 Defoe put up only one poor performance last year when he beat only one home in the St Leger at Doncaster. He was back on track in the John Porter Stakes at Newbury last time though, and can reverse the Classic form with Count Octave.
11||Weekend crossword No 383
11||Prize crossword No 27,501
11||Quick crossword No 14,974
10||'They don't belong': police called on Native American teens on college tourA mother on a Colorado college tour called the police on two Native American students in the group because they looked like “they don’t belong”, in the latest episode to ignite outrage over racial profiling and needless calls to law enforcement in the US. Two teenage brothers had traveled from New Mexico for the tour at Colorado State University (CSU) on Monday when a parent called the authorities on them, saying they were quiet and “creepy” and “really stand out”. The call prompted university police to question them, causing the young men to miss the rest of the tour, campus officials said. “They were shocked. They were trying to figure out what they did wrong,” said Lorraine Kahneratokwas Gray, whose sons Kanewakeron Thomas Gray, 19, and Skanahwati Lloyd Gray, 17, were on the tour. Video released by police showed the officers pulling them aside and asking them what was in their pockets while commanding them to keep their “hands out”. “It could have ended so much more tragically. When he reached into his pocket, what if the cop thinks he has a gun and shoots him?” the mother told the Guardian by phone. The incident, which prompted an apology from the university, comes amid a steady stream of similar accounts across the US, including police responding to calls targeting African American patrons in Starbucks, a golf course, a gym and a Waffle House. A black former White House staffer said he was moving into an apartment building in New York last week when a resident called police on him, reporting an “active burglary”. In two recent California cases, calls to law enforcement led police to fatally shoot unarmed black men – Diante Yarber in a Walmart parking lot and Stephon Clark in his family’s backyard. The 911 caller, who has not been named, told a dispatcher that the students’ “behavior is just really odd”, according to audio released on Friday. “They’re definitely not a part of the tour.” The woman further said the black clothing they were wearing was suspicious, that they appeared to be Hispanic and that one was from Mexico. She later added: “They just really stand out … They’re just creepy kids … It actually made me feel sick.” The mother, who left the tour to call police, said another man on the tour also “believed they don’t belong”. The woman claimed that the teens weren’t answering her questions about why they were there and “were lying the whole time”. Lorraine, an indigenous activist in New Mexico, said her sons had saved up money to drive seven hours to CSU, their “dream school”. When her 19-year-old called her, frantic, to tell her about the police, she thought he was joking. “It’s ridiculous,” she said. It quickly became clear to her that her sons’ lives could have been in danger, she said: “I could hear the fear and disappointment in his voice.” It was obvious that the mother on the tour had “profiled” her sons, Lorraine said, adding that she wished police and the guide had quickly resolved the situation without them missing the rest of the tour. “We want to make an example of this to protect young men in the future from having to go through something like this or something that could be so much worse,” she added. The brothers got lost and had shown up late, but were signed up for the tour. When police asked them why they were quiet on the tour, one of them said his brother was “shy”, according to five-minute body-camera footage of the questioning. “People were just worried ’cause you guys were just real quiet and didn’t answer any of their questions,” one officer said. CSU said in a statement that campus police “confirmed” the students were part of the tour and “allowed them to rejoin the group”, but that the tour had already moved on at that point. “This incident is sad and frustrating from nearly every angle, particularly the experience of two students who were here to see if this was a good fit for them as an institution,” administrators wrote, adding that they would refund travel expenses and were “reviewing how such an incident can be avoided or handled differently in the future”. Lloyd, a high school senior set to graduate this month, and Thomas, a first-year at a public college in New Mexico, were both musicians and were particularly interested in moving to Denver due to its music scene, their mother said. But it’s uncertain if they would still consider CSU, said Lorraine, noting that they were “trying to process all of our thoughts”. “There’s a part of us that feels like we don’t ever want to go back there again,” she said. “But maybe we feel an obligation to future generations to be pioneers in a sense, to make that presence and to effect that change.” The family, originally from the Mohawk nation of Akwesasne in New York, has long been involved in activism, Lorraine said, adding: “This just makes our fight even stronger. It’s personal now.”
16||Tower Hamlets final council to declare – as it happenedLabour has gained control of Tower Hamlets council, over which no party previously had overall control, the Press Association reports. The party has won 23 of the 45 available seats, though some wards are still to declare. With that, we’re going to close this live blog. Thanks for reading. According to the Press Association, 149 of the 150 councils have now declared, with only Tower Hamlets’ results to come. Here’s how the main parties stand: Labour Councils: 73 (-1) Seats: 2,308 (+77) Conservatives Councils: 46 (-2) Seats: 1,230 (-93) Lib Dems Councils: 9 (+4) Seats: 536 (+77) Greens Seats: 39 (+8) Ukip Seats: 3 (-57) The former cabinet minister, Justine Greening, has hit out at her party colleagues in the Eurosceptic European Research Group (ERG), accusing them of behaving a “little bit like Russia ... vetoing things that they don’t like” during the Brexit deliberations. The rightwing group, led by the Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg, must understand that “no one is going to quite get their perfect outcome”, the former education secretary told Sky News. The sooner they all realise that and then work through the give and take and find a sustainable long-term solution on Brexit, the sooner we’ll be able to get on with the implementation planning around that which is urgent, and the sooner we’ll be able to get on with running the country and get on with the domestic agenda - for me the equality of opportunity - and the issues that are really at the heart of what I think people want tackled. Asked if the ERG was being given too much attention, Greening said: Well look, I think what we can’t have is a group of MPs who behave a little bit like Russia does on the Security Council - vetoing things that they don’t like. We have got to go forward on Brexit as a country together. That will mean give and take and people need to understand that, whatever wing of my party they are on, and whatever elements of the Leave/Remain debate they are on. I’m afraid no one is going to quite get their perfect outcome. She also told the broadcaster she was concerned the Brexit war cabinet would find itself out of step with the Tory party when it discusses what sort of customs arrangement it wants with the European Union post-Brexit. I think it’s time for the moderates in the party like myself to work with the prime minister on a sensible approach to the customs policy and a broader package and then make sure this is something we can get through Parliament. Here’s an update on the 146 councils out of 150 that have declared so far: Labour Councils: 70 (-1) Seats: 2,133 (+72) Conservatives Councils: 46 (-2) Seats: 1,295 (-85) Lib Dems Councils: 9 (+4) Seats: 528 (+79) Greens Seats: 33 (+3) Ukip Seats: 3 (-57) There is no overall control in 21 councils (-1) Labour retains Hounslow, winning 33 of the available 60 seats. The Conservatives have won six seats so far, with 21 still to declare. Here are some analysis articles about the local elections that are worth reading. Rafael Behr at the Guardian says the political pendulum is stuck. The pendulum is stuck. The traditional laws of political gravity predict a swing away from the party of national government in local elections, but it has been a while since British politics followed the obvious arc of precedent. If last night’s council election results conform to any pattern, it is the laudable habit that voters have acquired of giving party leaders cause to scratch their heads and wonder what the hell is going on. There is no big national winner. Since the Tories were braced for a mauling and escaped without one, Theresa May will be feeling relatively relaxed today. Labour needed to demonstrate that last year’s general election gains were a staging post on the road to national power; that destiny was calling Jeremy Corbyn. Destiny didn’t hang up the phone, but it has put the opposition on hold. Labour had ambitious targets – Tory bastions in London such as Westminster and Wandsworth – that did not fall. Gary Gibbon at Channel 4 News says the election results will encourage Tory Brexiters. One pro-remain Conservative told me last night’s results were “a bit of a disaster for our side.” He said they would encourage Tories to see Brexit supporters as their core demographic and prioritise pleasing them. At the same time, he worried, Labour would now feel it has to go hunting lost Brexit support to make up vital electoral ground outside London. The more hardline amongst the Brexit-supporting Tory MPs might be emboldened by the overnight results in some pro-leave areas of England. Those who have been waving around letters to Graham Brady, the chairman of the 1922 committee, calling for a vote of no confidence in Theresa May, could in the tense weeks and months ahead feel that throwing the pieces in the air and seeing where they land, even if it heightens the risk of a general election, is not such a risk as some have suggested and preferable to what they see as a heavily diluted Brexit. Owen Jones at the Guardian says Labour had its best result in London since 1971. When is a victory a defeat? Labour won its best local election results in London – and the Tories their worst results – since 1971. Although the Tories largely benefited nationally from the implosion of Ukip, as things stand, Labour have dozens of net gains. That doesn’t mean Labour doesn’t need to learn lessons and act on them (it does) or that these results are good enough (they’re not). But the surreal triumphalism of Tories and pundits – who are desperate to return to a world before Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour won 40% of the vote and ended a generation-old political consensus – is almost pitiful. Faisal Islam at Sky News suggests the results show that both Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn have passed their moment of peak appeal. Katy Balls at the Guardian says “Corbyn’s messiah status has taken a knock”. Stephen Fisher, an academic who works with Prof John Curtice on BBC election analysis, says in a Prospect article that Brexit helped to explain voting patterns in the elections - except in areas with Jewish populations. The Conservatives have so far made 163 seat gains and suffered 165 losses. As a result they will likely end the day with a similar overall tally as the one they started with. Most, 89, of the Conservative losses were in London, and most, 132, of their gains were outside London. This differential in the Tory performance is part of a broader pattern whereby the Conservatives won more votes and seats in places which were more supportive of Brexit. As a result, the councils the party has won (Basildon, Peterborough, Redditch) are all places that voted to leave the EU at a rate of 61 per cent or more in 2016. The exception to this rule tells an important story linked to the row over anti-Semitism in the Labour Party. Of the wards across the country where the BBC collected the votes, Labour is up by just 3 points where more than 4 per cent of the population is Jewish, but the party is up by 7 points on average elsewhere. This correlation had a particular impact in both Barnet and Bury where the Jewish population is relatively large. That Labour not only failed to take its (notionally) easiest target in London, but the Conservatives actually managed to gain six seats and take control of Barnet (where 38 per cent voted Remain) is quite remarkable. Stephen Bush at the New Statesman floats the idea that local elections are becoming less useful as a means of predicting general election results because Labour may be increasingly reliant on voters who are inclined not to vote in the locals. I first advanced the theory that Labour’s electoral coalition might simply be becoming less likely to turn up in off-years under Ed Miliband as a possible explanation for why Labour were underperforming relative to the opinion polls. Of course, that wasn’t true in 2015, but it doesn’t mean it won’t turn out to be true in the future. Labour’s coalition has been getting younger, more likely to live in a city and more diverse pretty steadily since 2001 and it took a big leap forward in that direction in 2017. My feeling is that at some point that is going to mean that the predictive value of local election performances at general elections is going to change and change big. We may have reached that point already, but then again it may not. Bagehot at the Economist says the results show Corbynmania is dead. Mr Corbyn has a proud history of leaving commentators with egg all over their faces. He can summon up charisma when he needs it and has an extraordinary ability to keep battling on regardless of circumstances. He also has some huge advantages on his side. A Tory party that is deeply divided over the most important issue facing the country; an establishment that thinks that Brexit is a Tory-made disaster; a generational divide that has left people under 40 struggling to get their feet on the property ladder; and a widespread sense that the country’s infrastructure, from the NHS to the transport system, is on the verge of collapse. Even so, Corbynmania is now officially dead. That’s all from me for today. My colleague Kevin Rawlinson is now taking over. The Electoral Reform Society has warned of what it calls a “dark day for politics” after saying that almost 4,000 would-be voters were turned away from polling stations for not having the necessary ID in the five boroughs which tested out voter ID schemes on Thursday. The tally – carried out by the Democracy Volunteers group – estimated that 3,981 people were denied a ballot paper in all, 1.67% of the total number of votes cast. The scheme, which could be extended nationwide in future elections, saw varying ID requirements in Bromley, Woking, Gosport, Watford and Swindon. Critics had warned the trail was targeting a tiny problem of voter impersonation at polling booths, and risked putting off more vulnerable voters who might not hold the necessary documents, for example older people and the homeless. The total was reached by extrapolation of observations in the five areas, which saw 1.67% of voters turned away, and does not take into account those who might have come back later with the correct ID. Darren Hughes, chief executive of the Electoral Reform Society, said: Britain prides itself on being a leading democracy – but it is a dark day for politics when thousands of blameless people turn out to vote only to be refused. Our estimates, based on evidence gathered by electoral observers, reveal the shocking scale of the problem. These trials have been shown up to be the chaotic, undemocratic mess many predicted. Update: To clarify, while Democracy Volunteers provided the 1.67% figure, the extrapolation was done by the Electoral Reform Society; of it is independent. According to the BBC, the Conservative party has reinstated a candidate who won a seat in Sunderland who had been suspended over offensive social media posts, including one about Diane Abbott from several years ago. Abbott has posted a message on Twitter suggesting this shows the Tories are not taking the problem seriously. Here are some results that have come in in the last hour or so. Hackney Lab No change Lab gain 2, C gain 1, LD lose 3 New council: Lab 52, C 5 Lewisham Lab No change Lab gain 1, Green lose 1 New council: Lab 54 Haringey Lab No change LD gain 7, Lab lose 7 New council: Lab 42, LD 15 Newcastle-under-Lyme NOC No change Boundary change Ind down 6, C down 5, Lab down 5 New council: Lab 20, C 18, Ind 3, LD 3 Cherwell C No change C 12, Lab 3, LD 1, Vacant 1 Boundary change Lab up 1, LD up 1, C down 1, Ind down 1 New council: C 36, Lab 9, Ind 1, LD 1, Vacant 1 Manchester Lab No change Boundary change LD up 1, Lab down 1 New council: Lab 94, LD 2 A former mayor whose reinstatement gave the Conservatives control of a council by one seat has “sincerely apologised” over a racial Facebook joke which saw her suspended from the party, the Press Association reports. Rosemary Carroll, who made a post comparing an Asian with a dog last June, rejoined “as the votes were being counted” on Friday, giving the Tories narrow control of Pendle council in Lancashire. Conservative group leader Paul White said: The post was shared in error but Rosemary fully accepted the potential upset caused and sincerely apologised. Having served her suspension period she rejoined the party and completed additional diversity training. Carroll, a former mayor of Pendle who represents the Earby ward, previously said she meant to delete the post but accidentally published it in error. Leader of the Labour group, Mohammed Iqbal, said the situation was an “appalling state of affairs”. He said: Here’s a councillor who brought shame on the borough on an international level and was welcomed back into the fold with open arms simply to grab control to the council. She turned up with a Conservative rosette literally as the votes were being counted. Dan Jarvis used his victory after being elected as Sheffield city region’s mayor to call for a wider devolution deal for Yorkshire. The post has only just been established, and the job does not yet come with agreed powers, an agreed budget, or even an agreed salary. He said: I understood that the exceptional nature of my candidacy [ie, remaining an MP] would raise some eyebrows and it has. But I believed then, as I know now, that the exceptional circumstances of this mayoralty and the importance of devolution for the future of the UK meant that I couldn’t stand on the sidelines and that I had to step forward. I say this because I believe that the issue of devolution goes to the heart of two of the most important strategic issues that our country faces - how we respond to the causes of Brexit and how we prepare for a post-Brexit Britain. If we are to find the right answer to these questions we must be prepared to reform every aspect of our political system. Labour has retained control of Birmingham council, the Press Association reports. It has got 51 of the 101 seats, with 14 two-councillor wards yet to declare. Birmingham, which is the largest council in Britain, is one of the areas that has had all-out council elections (with all seats being up for grabs, not just the usual one third) following boundary changes. These are from the BBC’s Kathryn Stanczyszyn. Lord Heseltine, the Conservative former deputy prime minister, has told Sky News that he thinks the election results amount to a “stalemate”. He says he thinks Labour under Jeremy Corbyn has hit a “glass ceiling”. The Lib Dems have gained South Cambridgeshire from the Conservatives. Here are the figures. South Cambridgeshire LD gain from C Boundary change LD up 16, Lab up 1, C down 25, Ind down 4 New council: LD 30, C 11, Lab 2, Ind 2 Labour’s two most senior mayors have both within the last few minutes said that party must do more to address its antisemitism problem. Andy Burnham, the mayor of Greater Manchester, told Sky News that Labour had to take a “much firmer grip” on the issue because the anger against the party was “painfully real”. He said: It is clear that antisemitism was a very real issue in this campaign, not everywhere, but in areas where particularly there is a large Jewish community. That is true here in Greater Manchester. If you look at the Kersal ward in Salford, I was out there myself and it was a pretty sobering experience, to be honest, because the hurt and the anger is painfully real in those places. So what I would say back to Ken Livingstone and others how have made this argument that it’s all a smear designed to just undermine Jeremy Corbyn, let’s hope that these elections draw a very firm line under these arguments and basically knock it out, because the truth of the matter is there is a very real sense of rawness in the Jewish community. And the Labour party needs now to reach out in a much more convincing way to those communities and take a much firmer grip on this issue of antisemitism, and come to a resolution on some of the outstanding issues on it. And Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, said Jewish people in the capital did not fee comfortable voting for Labour. He told the BBC. I think there are lots of voters, Jewish people in London, who don’t feel comfortable voting Labour. That can’t be right. It can’t be right that anybody feels that the Labour party is a safe place for anyone who is an antisemitic person. Antisemitism is racism. We should have no truck with that. We need to make sure that we investigate any allegations made against anybody. I’m really please Jeremy Corbyn has now tasked the new general secretary, Jennie Formby, to investigate speedily those members of our party against whom allegations have been made. They should be kicked out if those allegations are upheld. The Labour MP Dan Jarvis has been elected mayor of Sheffield city region on the second count. Here are the second round voting figures. Dan Jarvis (Lab) 144,154 Ian Walker (C) 50,619 Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, is arguing that the local election results show why the government should remain committed to taking the UK out of the customs union. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Conservative MP and chair of the European Research Group, which is pushing for a harder Brexit, is saying the same thing. Commenting on this Tweet ... Rees-Mogg responded with this: Here are some more results that have come in over the last hour or so. Islington Lab No change New council: Lab 47, Green 1 Woking C No change C 5, LD 3, Lab 1, Ind 1 LD gain 1, C lose 1 New council: C 16, LD 8, Lab 3, Ind 3 Blackburn with Darwen Lab No change Boundary change Lab down 7, C down 4, LD down 2 New council: Lab 37, C 13, LD 1 Camden Lab No change Lab gain 4, LD gain 1, C lose 4, Ind lose 1 New council: Lab 43, C 7, LD 3, Green 1 Elmbridge NOC No change C 10, LD 3, R 3 C gain 3, LD gain 1, R lose 4 New council: C 24, R 15, LD 9 Watford LD No change LD 9, Lab 3 LD gain 1, Lab lose 1 New council: LD 26, Lab 10 Crawley Lab No change Lab 8, C 4 New council: Lab 20, C 17 According to the Press Association, 133 out of 150 councils have now declared. Here are the latest figures. Conservatives Councils: 44 (no change) Seats: 1,142 (-44) Labour Councils: 63 (-1) Seats: 1,741 (+75) Lib Dems Councils: 6 (+2) Seats: 408 (+39) Greens Seats: 33 (+4) Ukip Seats: 3 (-55) And here is the BBC’s estimate of what the House of Commons would look like if there were to be a general election with people voting in the same way as they did at the local elections. The BBC projection, like the Sky projection (see 2.18pm), anticipates a hung parliament. But the BBC has Labour on course to gain 21 seats, and the Tories on course to lose 38 seats, while Sky just anticipates more modest Tory losses. There’s a different between the two projections because the BBC and Sky use different methods to calculate how the local election results can be converted into a national share. The Liberal Democrats have gained Three Rivers, south-west Hertfordshire, from no overall control, the Press Association reports. They had eight councillors elected last night compared to four for the Conservatives and one for Labour. Here are the figures. Three Rivers LD gain from NOC LD 8, C 4, Lab 1 LD gain 1, Ind lose 1 New council: LD 20, C 16, Lab 3 The Labour MP Chuka Ummuna told the World at One that he wanted the party’s national executive committee to conduct a proper inquiry into why it did not do better at the elections. He said: From a Labour point of view there needs to be a proper post-mortem - I think the national executive committee should appoint somebody to do that - on this result. We haven’t gone forwards and if we are looking to form an election-winning majority, we cannot be confident of that happening based on the results yesterday. The sole Green councillor in Islington, Caroline Russell, has held her seat in Highbury East. This is from Caroline Lucas, the Green party co-leader. What do these projected national share (PNS) figures (see 2.31pm) actually mean? As usual, it depends. How it’s good for Labour Labour is getting the same of the vote as the Conservative party. They did not at the 2017 general election, and so in that respect they are moving forwards. Labour is also doing much better relative to the Tories than it was in the 2017 local elections (which were held a few weeks before the general election). In that contest the Tories had an 11-point lead on PNS. At 35%, Labour’s local election share of the PNS is the highest it has been since 2012 (when it was 38%). That was a year when the Lib Dem vote had collapsed, because of Nick Clegg going into the coalition, but the big Ukip rise had not fully materialised. How it’s bad for Labour Opposition parties almost always have to be ahead in mid-term local elections if they are going to go on and win the subsequent general election. Labour is not ahead. Labour is doing worse relative to the Tories on this measure than it was in 2014, when most of these seats were last fought. Four years ago Labour came out two points ahead on PNS. (The figures are here.) It is also doing worse than it did relative to the Tories in 2016, when on a relatively disappointing local elections night Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour was still one point ahead of the Tories on PNS. Excluding general election years, this is the first year since 1988 when Labour has been in opposition and it has not been ahead of the Conservatives on PNS at the local elections. There is a table with all the PNS figures going back to 1982 here. The BBC has now produced its projected national share figure. This is not the share of the vote figure in the actual elections (a fairly meaningless figure, because the councils where elections took place were not representative of Britain as a whole.) It is a calculation as to what the vote share would have been if all wards in Britain had voted in the same way as people voted yesterday. (More on how this works here.) These are the figures: Conservatives: 35% Labour: 35% Lib Dems: 16% Others: 14% Labour has retained Crawley after winning seven of the 12 seats being contested, the Press Association reports. The Conservatives won four, with one result to come. And the Tories are on course to retain control of Woking council in Surrey. According to Sky News, if there were a general election and people voted as they did in the local elections yesterday, there would be a hung parliament. Here are their figures. The only party that would celebrate a result like this would be the Lib Dems. They won 12 seats at the 2017 election, and so on the basis of this notional result, they would be up 14. Theresa May won 317 seats last year. On the basis of this result, she would be down 12. And Jeremy Corbyn, who won 262 seats at the general election, would be down one seat too. The Labour MP Dan Jarvis is on course to be elected mayor of the new Sheffield city region, but he did not win on the first round (ie, he did not get more than 50% of first preference votes.) Here are the first round results. Dan Jarvis (Lab) 122,635 (47.99%) Ian Walker (C) 37,738 (14.77%) Hannah Kitching (LD) 27,146 (10.62%) Mick Bower (Yorkshire) 22,318 (8.73%) Rob Murphy (Green) 20,339 (7.96%) David Allen (Eng Dem) 14,547 (5.69%) Naveen Judah (Save NHS) 10,837 (4.24%) The last four candidates have been eliminated, and their second-preference votes are being counted. Turnout was just 25.36%. Turning away from the local elections for a moment, my colleague Rajeev Syal has some good news for the Unite general secretary Len McCluskey. From my colleague Heather Stewart Here’s a BBC video clip with Prof John Curtice explaining what he thinks the election results means. His main takeaway is that, apart from the collapse of the Ukip vote, not a huge amount changed since 2014. Conservatives have lost Mole Valley, Surrey, to no overall control after losing one seat to the Liberal Democrats, the Press Association reports. The first results of the day are in from Manchester, with Labour holding on to all three seats in the Woodhouse Park ward, on a turnout of 18.04%, the Press Association reports. Manchester is holding “whole council” elections rather than the usual thirds, due to boundary changes; 32 wards will elect 96 councillors. Turnout ranges from 17% in Fallowfield to 46% in Chorlton. Good afternoon. I’m Andrew Sparrow, taking over from Jamie Grierson. Last week my colleagues Jessica Elgot and Heather Stewart reported that the Labour MP Heidi Alexander - a centrist, in Labour terminology, not a Corbynite - was thinking of standing down as an MP to take up a post working for Sadiq Khan at City Hall. According to Channel 4 News’ Michael Crick, we may get the announcement this afternoon. Rokhsana Fiaz was comfortably elected as mayor of Newham, east London with the Labour candidate achieving 73% share of the vote, Dan Sabbagh writes. She said she would use her mayoralty to “put people at the heart of what we do” and suggested that a Labour party rocked by the antisemitism crisis needed to do the same. “In this borough I will make sure we work closely with Muslim, Jewish and other communities to build bridges. I’m desperately sorry Labour lost in Barnet and I’m sure the party will reflect closely on what has happened in Barnet and elsewhere,” she said, speaking to the Guardian a few minutes after she was elected. Fiaz takes over the former Olympic borough after 23 years of rule by Sir Robin Wales, who she defeated in a primary contest earlier this year. The new mayor’s share of the vote was 12 percentage points higher than Wales achieved in 2014. One of her first steps will be to introduce a consultative youth citizen assembly in the borough; she also plans to review the finances in a borough that had to write off £52m in loans for the repurposing of the Olympic stadium for football in December. Liberal Democrat former cabinet minister, Ed Davey, said it had been a “brilliant night” for his party. Speaking at the Kingston-upon-Thames count, Davey said: “We’ve won councils like Richmond, we might well win here in Kingston, and there are one or two other counts coming later elsewhere in the country where we might well win control of the council. “So we might end up winning more councils net from the previous position than any other party.” Davey, who said the party had focused on local issues rather than simply Brexit in its campaigning, added: “Across the country this looks like a real fightback for the Liberal Democrats.” Labour sources at the count in Birmingham say it doesn’t look like a good performance for them, reports political editor Heather Stewart. All of the seats are up for grabs, and they’re being fought on new boundaries - but reports suggest Labour is struggling in white, working-class wards; while advancing in the inner city. Birmingham is hosting the Conservative party conference this year, as the party celebrates the success of Andy Street in winning the metropolitan mayorality. With the balance of power on the city council before yesterday’s poll 79 Labour seats to 29 Tories, there is no danger of Labour losing control, say those on the ground - but the party’s majority could be significantly reduced. The count is ongoing. In the West Midlands, Conservatives gained control of Redditch, taking two seats from Labour and one from Ukip. They have 16 seats out of 29, with two results to go. Latest tally from the Press Association: State of parties after 101 of 150 councils Conservatives: 31 councils; 892 seats (-26) Labour: 52 councils (-1); 1,444 seats (+59) LibDems: 4 councils (+1); 327 seats (+40) Green: 22 seats (+7) UKIP: 3 seats (-47) Independent: 58 seats (-57) Liberal: 1 seat (-1) Ratepayers and Residents: 41 seats No overall control: 14 councils There is mounting interest in the result in Birmingham, where there are suggestions Labour could lose, in what would be significant blow to the party. The Conservatives have already made gains in West Midlands, in Dudley and Walsall. Labour’s failure to take Barnet council from the Conservatives is directly related to the antisemitism scandal that has plagued the national party, say local activists and councillors. The north-west London council was Labour’s prime target in the capital. The party hoped to seize control from the Conservative-led administration whose focus on outsourcing earned them the nickname “Easycouncil”. Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, said Barnet was a Conservative “crown jewel” Labour could win, but overnight the Tories took back the council from no overall control. Barry Rawlings, Barnet’s Labour leader, laid the blame directly on the party’s antisemitism crisis, which has led to Jewish leaders and members of the community protesting against Jeremy Corbyn in Westminster: I want to speak directly to our Jewish brothers and sisters. I am extremely grateful to members of the Jewish community who cast votes for Labour. But too many didn’t. It wasn’t because they disagreed with our manifesto, but because they felt the Labour party has failed to deal with antisemitism on a national level. They are right. The prime minister has visited Wandsworth in south London to congratulate Conservatives on seeing off a challenge from Labour to hold on to control despite losing six seats. Theresa May said: “Labour thought they could take control, this was one of their top targets and they threw everything at it, but they failed. “The people of Wandsworth re-elected a Conservative council, and that’s for a simple reason. You charge the second lowest council tax in the country, you provide excellent local services like the weekly bin collection. “That’s the message of these elections across the country - that Conservative councils deliver great local services at lower taxes.” To cheers from activists waving Conservative banners, May added: “We’ve seen other success in London. We’ve held Hillingdon, Barnet, Westminster. “And outside of London, we’ve made progress in places like Dudley and Walsall. We’ve taken control in Basildon and Peterborough. And that’s all the result of the really hard work of our councillors, our activists, our supporters and our revitalised campaign machine. “But we won’t take anything for granted. We will continue to work hard for local people and we will build on this success for the future.” Labour’s deputy leader Tom Watson told the BBC: “We have consolidated the base we made after the General Election. If you looked at the national polls, it showed the parties were neck-and-neck and we have done rather better than that in some areas.” Mr Watson said Labour now has more councillors in London than at any time since the 1970s. “You can always do better, but we think we have consolidated our base and we are quietly satisfied with the result,” he said. The Conservatives became the biggest political party in the Black Country town of Walsall today, and are expected to form a minority administration. The Tories ended up with 30 seats, while Labour lost two to be left with 26, with the remaining four seats split between the Liberal Democrats and independents. They also made gains from UKIP, who lost all three of their councillors in Walsall. Previously Labour was in control with 28 seats to the Tories’ 24. Walsall Conservative leader Mike Bird is confident of getting the support he requires to run a minority administration. Labour was expected to hang on to power, with some activists claiming they would take an overall majority. It follows the Conservatives’ Eddie Hughes unexpected victory in the general election last year in Walsall North. Labour has called on the Government to scrap voter ID as a matter of urgency after a trial saw people in England turned away from polling booths for not carrying the necessary documents. Cat Smith MP, shadow minister for voter engagement and youth, said: There was absolutely no case for introducing voter ID in the first place but after yesterday’s fiasco, it is impossible for the Government to justify rolling it out. After completely ignoring a number of serious warning signs, the Government decided to pilot discriminatory measures which denied people their right to vote. We cannot allow the Conservative Party to undermine our democracy, which is why Labour is calling on the Government to scrap their voter ID plans as a matter of urgency. Ken Livingstone has been on Sky News talking about the local election results and the impact of allegations of antisemitism on the Labour party, from which he is currently suspended. Livingstone, who has been accused of antisemitism himself, denied previously labelling Adolf Hitler as a Zionist. He said: If you go on Jerusalem’s Holocaust memorial website, one of the documents you can download is about the deal that the Zionists did with Hitler did with the Zionists in the thirties. Hitler wanted to get all the Jews out of journey, and the Zionists wanted to move them all and create a Jewish state in Palestine. They collaborated, they didn’t like each other but they collaborated together to do that.” The former Labour MP and London mayor accepted that claims that he was antisemitic had hit the result in Barnet, where the Tories gained control: If anybody believes I said Hitler was a Zionist then yes, that is damaging. What’s been so bad is that two years on this smear about me is still there unchallenged.” Sky News presenter Adam Boulton suggested that “the best advice might be not to bring Hitler into contemporary politics”. “I only do it when I ask a question like you’ve just done,” Livingstone said. “I’ve never written a speech or article about Hitler. “It always gets you into trouble if you tell the truth,” he added. Asked if he should just retire, Livingstone said: “I’m not going to my grave without this issue being resolved.” Livingstone said the antisemitism row was a “distraction” from discussing Labour policies and also blamed moderate Labour MPs for attacking the party leader, Jeremy Corbyn. He said: “If we hadn’t had two years of Labour MPs undermining Jeremy, if they’d been out there campaigning, we only needed to take another seven seats and Jeremy would be leading a minority government … his policies connects with people.” He added: “Part of the problem is for the last month everything in the media about the Labour party has been about antisemitism. Any serious debate about our policies just hasn’t happened.” Livingstone said he was optimistic that he will not be expelled from the party. The leader of the Barnet Labour Group, Barry Rawlings, has issued a statement, in which he addresses the group’s “Jewish brothers and sisters”. He said Labour has failed to deal with “anti-semitism”. He said: I want to thank all Labour members in Barnet for their support and hard work, not just over the past few weeks, but over the past four years, and our wonderful candidates who could not have done anything more. We campaigned hard, we gave the Conservatives a tough time over their failure to run a fair, effective Council for the people of Barnet, and we have built, and will continue to build, good relationships with all of Barnet’s communities. That wasn’t enough this time. I am confident we can bounce back from this but to do so we will need to work harder still. I want to speak directly to our Jewish brothers and sisters. I am extremely grateful to all members of the Jewish community who cast votes for Labour yesterday. But too many didn’t. It wasn’t because they disagreed with our manifesto, but because they felt the Labour Party has failed to deal with anti-Semitism at a national level. They are right. I pledge that Barnet Labour will be a beacon to the rest of the Labour Party in tackling and defeating this anti-Semitism virus that has infected our party. For me dealing with anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, and all forms of hate is not an electoral issue, win or lose, it’s a moral responsibility that defines who we are as a Party. I am so proud of the work we have done both within and across communities, faiths, backgrounds. We either fix this or our values of equality, social justice and human rights die. I pledge that Barnet Labour will be at the forefront of this collective effort by the Party we all love and wish to see succeed. Jeremy Corbyn, leader of the Labour Party, has issued a statement on the local election results. Labour achieved a solid set of results in the local elections. We have consolidated and built on the advances we made at last year’s General Election, when we won the largest increase in Labour’s share of the vote since 1945. In these elections we have won seats across England in places we have never held before. We won Plymouth from the Tories, who lost control of Trafford, their flagship northern council. And Labour has won even more council seats than at our high watermark of 2014. Last year Labour showed the difference we can make in a full national campaign. This year our members and supporters campaigned in impressive numbers. And their energy, talent and enthusiasm will continue to take Labour’s message of real change to communities across the whole country. In a sign of how worried they are about Labour’s advance, the Tories talked up our chances to unrealistic levels, especially in London. The results show they’re right to be worried - we came within a whisker of winning Wandsworth for the first time in over 40 years. The Labour Party is now well placed to fight and win the next General Election – and form a government that will work for the many, not the few. Labour MP Lisa Nandy says last night’s performance for Labour, losing ground in Wigan, Bolton and Dudley, underlines the fact that Labour’s message is failing to appeal to voters in Britain’s towns. While Labour comfortably held her own local council of Wigan last night, the Conservatives got more votes there than at any time since 1979. “For a lot of people who choose to forgo the fast pace and diversity and access to culture of cities, the reason they do that is because they value the sense of community you feel very strongly in places like mine,” she says. She says politicians, including Labour, have failed to address the decline in local jobs and opportunities that has eroded this sense of community. “Towns like mine have really found themselves at the sharp end over the last 30 years. Demographic changes mean we have an ageing population - young people who used to go away to study and come back, have found there’s nothing to come back to. Wages are low, which accounts for the decline of high streets and pubs.” “People have looked to politics for some time to solve this and seen us obsessed with a city-centric model which is reliant on the benefits trickling down.” She warns: “Unless Labour gets to grips with that, the next election is far from secure, with Labour piling up the votes in cities, and the Tories having a near-monopoly on the countryside”. “It’s about jobs, jobs, jobs jobs,” she says. “Politicians need to catch up. Whoever gets this towns argument will win the next general election and the one after that.” Theresa May has tweeted congratulations to a couple of councils, which saw holds and gains for her Conservative party in the local elections. State of parties after 98 of 150 councils: Conservatives: 30 councils; 878 seats (-31) Labour: 50 councils (-1); 1,424 seats (+57) LibDems: 4 councils (+1); 324 seats (+41) Green: 21 seats (+6) UKIP: 2 seats (-44) Independent: 61 seats (-49) Liberal: 1 seat (-1) Ratepayers and Residents: 37 seats (-4) No overall control: 14 councils Ukip general secretary Paul Oakley has insisted it was not “all over” for the party and has defended his party by comparing it favourably to the Black Death. He said the plague had caused a lot of disruption in the Middle Ages before going “dormant”. “It’s not all over at all,” Oakley told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “Think of the Black Death in the Middle Ages. It comes along and it causes disruption and then it goes dormant, and that’s exactly what we are going to do. Our time isn’t finished because Brexit is being betrayed.” Challenged over whether he wanted to compare his party to a plague that killed millions of people, Oakley said: “Absolutely. What’s wrong with that?” He pointed to positive outcomes from the Black Death: “It also led to economic growth and the Renaissance. It got rid of the whole issue of servitude, basically, and allowed people to go into the towns and escape their landlords and create their own businesses.” Anti-racism group, Hope Not Hate, has hailed the demise of “far right and radical right” political parties in the local elections. Hope Not Hate said it had been a “disastrous” night for Ukip, which it accused of plying anti-Muslim rhetoric under its leader Gerard Batten. Far-right parties – such as the British National Party and Anne Marie Waters’ For Britain Movement – also failed across the board, the group said. Nick Lowles, chief executive of HOPE not hate, said: “We should take a moment to enjoy the decline of extremist parties. It’s down to the hard work of thousands of anti-racist campaigners up and down the country, as well as incompetence and defections on the part of Ukip and the far right.” The Guardian’s associate editor, Dan Sabbagh, has written an analysis of the local election results. Labour made limited progress, but failed to produce the kind of surge that would allow the party to claim it is a government-in-waiting, he writes, while Theresa May can be modestly relieved, although the results do not necessarily point to her party winning an overall Westminster majority either. Read the full piece here: More from Jeremy Corbyn on the local election results. Asked whether the night’s results showed that Labour had passed the point of “peak Corbyn”, Corbyn said: “No, no, there is much more to come and it’s going to get even better.” The Labour leader told Sky News: “We were defending seats that were last won in 2014, which was a particularly good year for Labour in local government. “Obviously, I am disappointed at any places where we lost a bit of ground, but if you look at the overall picture, Labour gained a lot of seats across the whole country, we gained a lot of votes in places we never had those votes before.” He added: “We are ready for a general election whenever it comes. A year ago, a general election was surprisingly called and we had the biggest swing to Labour for decades. “We are absolutely ready for it. We have got members, we have got organisation, we have got enthusiasm.” The Jewish Labour Movement, the affiliated society for Jewish Labour supporters, say they will be holding an urgent meeting with Labour’s new general secretary Jennie Formby to discuss the impact anti-semitism had on the party’s local election results. JLM’s spokesman Ivor Caplin said: “For the second time within a year, England has seen the electoral impact of the Labour Party’s problem with antisemitism. “For the Party of anti-racism to lose seats because of antisemitism is a sad chapter in our proud history. JLM will be meeting with Jennie Formby next week and will be urgently raising this.” Labour’s Jess Phillips take on the local election results: In other election news, Sinn Fein are celebrating in Northern Ireland with a by-election victory in West Tyrone. Orfhlaith Begley, 26, declared herself a history maker as she became the first woman elected as MP for the West Tyrone constituency. The solicitor from the Co Tyrone village of Carrickmore secured an almost 8,000 majority in the parliamentary by-election, ahead of second placed Democratic Unionist Thomas Buchanan, though Sinn Fein’s percentage of the vote did drop from more than 50% in last year’s general election to 47%. The political newcomer comfortably held on to a seat relinquished by party colleague Barry McElduff when he quit amid a furore over a controversial social media post. McElduff resigned as MP for the area in January, 10 days after a controversy flared when he posted a video of himself with a Kingsmill-branded loaf on his head on the anniversary of the notorious Kingsmill massacre. Jeremy Corbyn made an early-morning visit to Plymouth to celebrate his party seizing control of the city’s council. Surrounded by cheering activists at Plymouth Hoe, the Labour leader said he was “delighted” by the result, adding: “The South West has the unenviable title of being the low-pay capital of Britain. That’s got to change and a Labour government will offer that change. “Today, winning Plymouth is a sign Labour is back in this part of Britain. Labour is back to gain parliamentary seats. “The mission of Labour is always to stand for a decent society and stand up against poverty in Britain, and that means local government must be properly funded by central government, and local councils that want to deal with the housing crisis and the social care crisis, and want a cleaner, better environment, are the ones that they should be supporting.” Brandon Lewis, the Conservative party chairman, said his party had a “reasonable night, a good night”. “We’ve seen interesting results across the country,” he told BBC Radio 4 Today programme. “When we look at what Labour were predicting... that simply hasn’t happened.” “When they were claiming the whole of London was going to turn red, they’ve not gained a single council.” Asked if the Tories have problem in urban areas, he said: “We’re working hard all over the country. We have to work and learn from that over the next few years as we go towards the next general election as we’re delivering on those domestic agendas on issues that matter to people in their lives every day. Adam Langleben, a Labour councillor who lost his seat in Barnet, told the Guardian: We knew this was a possibility since last night, that this was worse than the general election in 2017. Things have definitely shifted since June. Every Jewish Labour household we visited, people said, “not this time.” Activists were being told, “this is a racist party, an anti-Semitic party”, doors were slammed in their faces. We as Jewish Labour activists were told we were endorsing anti-semitism. The reason we have lost here is the inability to deal with this issue and to tackle anti-semitism. Jeremy Corbyn was supposed to come here tomorrow for a victory speech. We want him to come to Barnet anyway, to apologise to Jewish Labour activists, to Barnet Labour and to the Jewish community here so we can start the healing process. We won this election on ideas, the Tories just ran a relentlessly negative campaign. But just look at the wards with high Jewish populations where we lost, East Barnet, Brunswick Park, West Hendon. The seats with even higher Jewish populations, where Labour didn’t target as hard, the Tories have huge landslides. The Labour leadership and people around them have seen the signs for a long time and they have not acted. I’m not quitting, this is about the health of our democracy. We have two parties of government in this country and one has a sickness that it needs to deal with. People need to join the party; they need to educate people and those who are anti-Semitic need to be immediately expelled. But first of all, the party can start by listening to Jewish activists and the community. Andrew Gwynne, Labour’s national campaign coordinator and a shadow communities minister, admitted the anti-semitism row had led to the Conservative victory in Barnet. “It disappoints me,” he said on BBC Radio 4’s Today Programme. We have got a job to do to rebuild trust and confidence with the Jewish community across the country. I’m sure that is the case. I see it as my job to help rebuild that trust with the Jewish community. There are so many Jewish people who do share Labour’s values. Looking at the overall picture, Gwynne said “there was always going to be a limited number of gains we could make”. “It was an election of consolidation,” he said. He cited Labour victory in Trafford as a significant achievement but admitted there had been some “disappointing results in other parts of the country”. Asked about Labour’s performance in London, Gwynne said: “We did pick up seats in those areas.” “What we’ve seen is that politics is very polarised,” he said. “All published opinion polls show Labour and Tories pretty much neck and neck.” Here’s some reaction from the Twitter commentariat to the result in Barnet, which saw the Conservative win control, taking it back from “no overall control”. The Conservatives have won control of Barnet Council, taking it back from no overall control. The seat was a Labour target and political commentators on Twitter are already putting the result down to the anti-semitism row engulfing the Labour party. Barnet has a significant Jewish population, according to census data, with the second largest religious group being Jewish. Earlier, a defeated Labour councillor in West Hendon tweeted an apparent reference to the party’s anti-Semitism row, saying “we must NEVER have another election like this” after the Conservatives took all three seats from the party in the ward. Outgoing councillor Adam Langleben, who also sits on the national executive committee of Jewish Labour, tweeted: “No community group should have their vote dictated by their safety. That should shame us UKLabour.” The results are now in from 94 of the 150 councils holding elections. Here are the latest figures. Conservatives Councils: 28 (-1) Seats: 776 (-11) Labour Councils: 48 (-1) Seats: 1,291 (+44) Lib Dems Councils: 4 (+1) Seats: 324 (+45) Greens Seats: 21 (+6) Ukip Seats: 2 (-41) That’s all from me. My colleague Jamie Grierson is taking over now. Here are the latest results from London. Conservatives Councils: 4 (-1 - Richmond) Seats: 271 (-46) Labour Councils: 8 (no change) Seats: 434 (+29) Lib Dems Councils: 2 (+1 - Richmond) Seats: 94 (+18) On the Today programme Caroline Lucas, the Green party’s co-leader, said the Greens had had “a really good night”. She said that they were now the official opposition in Richmond, that they had seats on four new councils and that some of the best results they were expecting were yet to come in, in places like Islington and Lambeth. Martha Kearney, the presenter, said the BBC’s analysis was that the Greens were only getting 6.5% in the wards they were fighting, a drop of 1.5% compared with 2014. In their morning email, the New Statesman’s Stephen Bush and Dulcie Lee reckon that the biggest winner of election night was the Lib Dems. Here’s an excerpt. Much to everyone’s surprise, the winner of the local elections is .... Vince Cable. The Liberal Democrats harvested local discontent effectively in Sunderland, gave Labour a fright in Hull, won back Richmond at a clip, held onto Sutton, Eastleigh and Cheltenham and are at time of writing the biggest gainers as far as seat gains go It will silence - at least for a while - the noises off about Cable and his leadership. I’m finally leaving Kensington town hall following a disappointing night for Labour. The party had hoped to make gains in the west London borough, which is still dealing with the aftermath of the Grenfell Tower disaster, amid speculation that it had an outside chance of taking control of the council. Instead Labour gained just one councillor as the Conservatives won another overwhelming majority, maintaining their control of a borough they have run since 1964. Labour even failed to take wards such as Chelsea Riverside, which it had been confident of winning from the Tories, as some local party activists suggested Grenfell had not been the deciding issue for most voters in the election, especially in the wealthier south of the borough. The final results left the Tories with 36 seats, and Labour on 13. “We all recognise we still need to rebuild trust,” said Conservative leader Elizabeth Campbell. “We must be and we will be open to all voices of our communities.” “We all live in the shadow of Grenfell. Grenfell was, Grenfell is, and Grenfell will be our first priority.” There were few signs of a revival for the Lib Dems, who clung on to their single councillor while showing few signs of progress elsewhere, even in a borough that voted 69% in favour of remain at the EU Referendum. It was even worse for the new Advance Together political party, which had been compared to French President Emmanuel Macron’s En Marche movement. It ran candidates in most wards, declaring that the “narrow demands of party politics has ill-served the people of Kensington &amp; Chelsea”. The people of Kensington &amp; Chelsea felt otherwise and the party came consistently last. Kensington and Chelsea is London’s smallest borough by population and just 37,000 ballots were returned in Thursday’s election. Despite this the final results were only declared at 6.30am, hours after many other larger councils had finished counting and gone home. Bleary-eyed Labour activists were left wondering what went wrong. Richard Angell, director of Progress, the Blairite pressure group in the Labour party (which is much disliked by the Corbynites), says Labour would not win a general election on the basis of these results. Nickie Aiken, the Conservative leader of Westminster city council, claimed her party’s victory in the borough was partly a vote against Momentum. She said: Labour thought they could take Westminster city council, and the people of Westminster sent a very clear message that Westminster would remain Conservative. The Labour party threw everything they had at us today. We had hordes of Momentum supporters throughout Westminster, particularly in the south, and the people of Westminster sent them the message ‘We do not like your politics’. More from Prof John Curtice, the BBC’s elections analyst, on Labour. He said: There is very little in the way of Labour gains. Yes, they have denied the Tories control of Trafford but that’s a very strong remain area. Beyond that, there isn’t very much for the Labour party to celebrate. In London, with only a few wards yet to declare results, the Conservatives have retained control of Kensington and Chelsea. And Labour have retained control of Brent after winning 33 seats, with the Conservatives on three and 24 results still to come. The Tories have taken all three West Hendon seats from Labour in Barnet, the Press Association reports. This is from the Independent’s Benjamin Kentish. Theresa May has emerged unscathed from her first major electoral test since the general election. In a night that saw all the major parties make some initial gains as the Ukip vote collapsed, preliminary analysis suggested that outside London there was a swing from Labour to the Conservatives. In London the trend was different, but Labour failed to secure some of the high-profile council gains that some in the party had been hoping might prove possible. Overall it was a mixed night, and very few councils have so far changed hands (see 4.02am), but that was a relief to the Conservatives who know that in local elections governing parties often do much worse. With results in from 87 of the 150 councils in England holding elections, all three main parties had achieved net gains in numbers of seats. Labour was on 1,072 seats (+30), the Conservatives 642 (+16) and the Lib Dems 278 (+24). Labour had won 44 councils (-1), the Conservatives 27 (no change) and the Lib Dems 3 (no change). Ukip were the biggest losers of the night. With results in from 87 councils, they had lost 35 seats, and won just 2. The BBC said its analysis of voting suggested that the Conservatives and Labour were either level-pegging, or else one party was marginally ahead of the other. Prof John Curtice, who analyses the figures for the BBC, said an early analysis of the figures suggested there had been a 1% swing to the Conservatives outside London, compared with 2014, but a swing to Labour in the capital. But his team is still analysing the results and firm figures will be released later. The Conservatives comfortably held off Labour challenges to some of their flagship councils in London. They have retained control of Wandsworth and Westminster, and Labour has conceded that the Tories will also hold Kensington and Chelsea. Governing parties expect to lose ground in mid-term local elections, but in some areas they were making progress. They gained control of Basildon and Peterborough, both from no overall control. Labour claimed the results showed the party had consolidated its position. It did not achieve a dramatic breakthrough, and party figures admitted the results were “mixed”, but it gained Plymouth from the Conservatives and won enough seats in Tory-led Trafford to tip it into no overall control. Curtice said, if Labour and the Conservatives ended the day roughly equal in terms of the national share of the vote, that would allow Labour to claim it had made progress since the general election, when the Tories were ahead. (See 5.37am.) The Lib Dems have won back Richmond from the Conservatives and are confident of gaining back Kingston-upon-Thames too, when counting there concludes later today. This is from Sky’s Lewis Goodall. On the BBC Jonathan Ashworth has just said that Labour has been too slow to deal with some of the allegations of antisemitism against party members. He said that one problem was that, when cases got taken to the national executive committee for disciplinary action, some NEC members were too willing to give the offenders the benefit of the doubt. Prof John Curtice and his team analyse the election results to produce an estimate for the national share of the vote. (See 11.46pm.) He said that there was a small swing to the Conservatives, compared with four years ago, outside London, but that London was different. He said, in terms of the share of the vote, they were not quite sure whether Labour and the Conservatives were “exactly even-stevens” or whether one party was slightly ahead. He went on: Although these results are not particularly good for Labour, they are better, relatively speaking, than they were in the general election last year. So you certainly can’t argue that the Labour party has not made any progress as compared with last year’s general election [where the Tories were ahead]. But, on the other hand, you can’t necessarily argue the Labour party is in a stronger position than they were in the 2016 local elections as well as the 2014 local elections [in both of which Labour ended up ahead]. Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, told BBC News that the results were “mixed” for Labour. But he said the party was making progress. And he claimed that Labour thought, on the basis of the way people voted tonight, it would win the Putney parliamentary seat, which is currently held by the Conservative Justine Greening with a a majority of 1,554. On the same programme John Curtice disputed this. He said that he thought the Tories would hold Putney on the basis of these results. But he said his own analysis of the Wandworth result suggested the Conservatives would now be on course to win Battersea (a seat Labour gained from the Tories at the general election, with a majority of 2,416). This is from Jonathan Carr-West, chief executive of the Local Government Information Unit, on the results so far. We’ve only seen a few councils change hands at this stage in the results but at present it looks like a better night for the Conservatives than many would have anticipated, while Labour results have not quite lived up to expectations. In London, Labour were targeting flagship Conservative councils like Wandsworth and Westminster but have fallen short despite increasing their number of seats. Labour needed to talk up the possibility of gains to get their vote out, but now risk disappointment even though Wandsworth and Westminster (both Conservative for more than 40 years) were always going to be a long shot. Outside London the picture is one of Conservative consolidation. In places like Swindon, Nuneaton, Basildon and Southend, Labour need to win if they are to win a general election but the Conservatives are tightening their grip. Meanwhile, the Lib Dems made big strides in terms of numbers of councillors and swept away the Conservatives in Richmond presumably benefiting from being the only major party opposed to Brexit in the borough that recorded one of the highest remain votes in the country. Overall though, we seem to be seeing an entrenchment of the status quo; a divided Britain in which big cities vote Labour and everywhere else votes Conservative. A much-touted Labour attempt to wrestle control of Wandsworth – controlled by the Tories since 1978 - was foiled after the Conservatives successfully concentrated resources in key strongholds amid a significantly increased turnout. However, Labour came close on a night when it gained seven seats on a flagship Tory council that has been known for its ultra low council tax and outsourcing of local services since 1978. The final results left the Tories on 33 seats, Labour on 26 and one in the hands of Malcolm Grimston, a former Conservative-turned independent who had the largest personal vote of the night (4002). Even before the results started to come in, London’s Mayor Sadiq Khan had earlier sought to manage expectations when he arrived at the count in South London where his party had needed to take 12 Tory seats to win outright control. “Of course we may not win councils but I think winning councillors who are Labour is a fantastic achievement,” he said, when it was put to him by reporters that he and other Labour figures had “talked up” the possibility of winning Wandsworth. While Labour did make gains at the expense of the Tories, the latter fended of the challenge by bringing home increased votes to retain control of all seats in wards such as Fairfield, Thamesfield and Southfields. Ravi Govindia, the Tory leader of the council, said: The strategy was to take the message to every household to every door to every resident and convince them that this was a council that had not run out of steam. Bright spots for Labour included Queenstown, where it made a gain from the Tories, and where councillors included 25-year-old Aydin Emre Dikerdem, who won a by-election in 2016. Another story of the night was the sheer irrelevance of explicitly anti Brexit parties in a part of London that recorded a 75% for Remain during the referendum on membership of the EU. Both the Liberal Democrats and Renew, a new party seeking to carve out ground on the centre, failed to make any real threats to the Tories or Labour in what was entirely a two-horse race. Renew’s founder, former Foreign Office anti-terrorist officer Chris Coghlan, said that he was “pretty happy” with Renew’s performance in target wards such as Balham, where he finished ahead of the three Liberal Democrats. Here are the figures from Richmond. This is from OnLondon’s Dave Hill, who says the electoral pact that the Lib Dems and the Greens were operating in the borough seems to have worked. And the Conservatives have held Westminster too. Westminster C No change Lab gain 4, C lose 4 New council: C 41, Lab 19 According to the Press Association’s Ian Jones, only 19 more councils will declare tonight. The Conservatives have held Wandsworth. It is a flagship Tory low tax borough, quoted approvingly by Theresa May at PMQs on Wednesday, and Labour would loved to have won it, although that was always a very high ask. Labour hasn’t won it since 1974. Here are the figures. Wandsworth C No change Lab gain 7, C lose 6, Ind lose 1 New council: C 33, Lab 26, Ind 1 Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, has just told BBC News that he thinks the Ukip vote is going to different parties. In some areas it was going to the Lib Dems, he said. That sounded counter-intuitive, he accepted, but it was in some respects a protest vote. Here are the latest figures for London. Conservatives Councils: 1 Seats: 76 (+10) Labour Councils: 2 Seats: 118 (+3) Lib Dems Councils: 1 Seats: 33 (-11) Here is another slug of results. Welwyn Hatfield C No change C 8, LD 6, Lab 5 LD gain 3, C lose 2, Lab lose 1 New council: C 25, Lab 15, LD 8 Bradford Lab No change Lab 20, C 8, LD 2 Lab gain 3, C gain 1, Ind lose 2, LD lose 1, Green lose 1 New council: Lab 52, C 22, Ind 7, LD 7, Green 2 Winchester C No change LD 9, C 6 LD gain 2, C lose 1, Ind lose 1 New council: C 23, LD 22 Hillingdon C No change C gain 2, Lab lose 2 New council: C 44, Lab 21 Daventry C No change C 11, Lab 2 Lab gain 2, UKIP lose 2 New council: C 30, Lab 5, LD 1 North East Lincolnshire NOC No change C 10, Lab 5, LD 1 C gain 3, Lab gain 2, UKIP lose 3, LD lose 1, Ind lose 1 New council: Lab 19, C 18, LD 4, Ind 1 Sutton LD No change C gain 10, Ind gain 1, LD lose 11 New council: LD 33, C 18, Ind 3 Waltham Forest Lab No change Lab gain 3, C lose 2, Ind lose 1 New council: Lab 46, C 14 Eastleigh LD No change Boundary change C down 2, Ind down 2, LD down 1 New council: LD 32, C 4, Ind 3 Cheltenham LD No change LD 17, C 3, Ind 1 LD gain 3, Ind lose 2, C lose 1 New council: LD 32, C 6, Ind 2 The Lib Dems have gained Richmond and they are confident of gaining Kingston too, party sources says. They also held Sutton, Eastleigh and Cheltenham. They claim holding Sutton was significant because the Conservatives fought it hard. On the BBC Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, says the results are pretty good for Labour. “We are making gains in the sorts of constituencies that will decide the next election,” he says, citing Chingford, Putney and Plymouth as examples. The Conservative MP Johnny Mercer, a former soldier and MP for Plymouth Moor view, told the BBC that the government’s approach to defence had contributed to the Conservatives losing the city’s council. He said: We’ve lost control of the council. I think across the country, clearly, it’s not been a good night for Labour, but certainly challenging down here. It’s pretty clear to me the biggest factor in this city is defence. It always has been. I’ve made very public my concerns around the handling of defence at the moment and what the vision is. On Sky News Sky’s election expert Michael Thrasher was asked whether it was fair to say this was a bad night for Labour. He did not want to go that far. But it was “certainly not a good night”, he said. Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, told the programme the results were at the higher end of his party’s expectations. He claimed that the results would lead to Labour party members wondering whether, under Jeremy Corbyn, the party was too London-centric. More news snaps from the Press Association. Labour looks set to retain control of its mayoral seat in Tower Hamlets with a party source saying they are “very confident” John Biggs will be returned The Liberal Democrats have gained control of the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames after winning at least 38 of the 54 seats. The Conservatives have retained control of Hillingdon, after winning 35 of the 65 seats. The Conservatives have retained control of Winchester City Council despite losing one seat to the Liberal Democrats. Here are the figures for Derby. Derby Lab lose to NOC C 8, Lab 5, LD 2, UKIP 2 C gain 2, UKIP gain 1, Lab lose 3 New council: Lab 23, C 20, LD 5, UKIP 3 Carrie Symonds, the Conservative party’s director of communications, has taken to Twitter to gloat. Wandsworth might have voted remain by 75% in the referendum on membership of the EU, but another story of tonight was the sheer irrelevance of explicitly anti Brexit parties. Both the Liberal Democrats and Renew, a new party seeking to carve out ground on the centre, failed to make any real threats to the Tories or Labour in what was entirely a two-horse race. If there is a tiny ‘civil war’ among the remain parties however, it was members Renew who were patting themselves on the back. Its founder, former Foreign Office anti-terrorist officer Chris Coghlan, said that he was “pretty happy” with Renew’s performance in target wards such as Balham, where he finished ahead of the three Liberal Democrats. The figures are small however: Coghlan polled 568 in a ward where three Tories romped home with more than 7,000 votes between them. So what happened to the 75% remain vote? The answer may or may not be down to the fact that this was about bins rather than Brexit. “The results will have been blurred by the fact that this was a local election,” said Coghlan. “We are also a startup and it’s about building ourselves as a party that is fundamentally about more than just being anti-Brexit.” According to the Press Association, results are now in from 71 of the 150 councils where elections have been taking place. Here are the figures. Conservatives Councils: 20 (nc) Seats: 412 (+27) Labour Councils: 37 (-1) Seats: 743 (+9) Lib Dems Councils: 2 (nc) Seats: 180 (+21) Greens Seats: 15 (+4) Ukip Seats: 2 (-29) And here are the councils that have changed hands. Conservative gains Basildon (from no overall control) Peterborough (from no overall control) Conservative losses Trafford (to no overall control) Plymouth (to Labour) Labour gains Plymouth (from Conservative) Labour losses Nuneaton &amp; Bedworth (to no overall control) Derby (to no overall control) Labour has become the biggest party in Trafford, winning four seats from the Tories to take their total to 30. After a surprise double win by the Green party in Altrincham, the Conservative party was left with 29 seats, down from 33. “I’m absolutely ecstatic,” said Andrew Western, leader of the Labour group on Trafford council. “This is far beyond our expectations. We hoped to tip the council into no overall control tonight, but to have become the largest party at the same time is a fantastic bonus. We could not be happier.” Conservative council leader Sean Anstee said his party would have to reflect on the results. He said: Elections in Trafford have always been tight and clearly, as the only Conservative-majority council in Greater Manchester, surrounded by a number of Labour councils, we’ve seen significant opposition activity into the borough over the last six months or so. He said that wards that had changed hands also saw a significant increase in turnout. “A number of voters who ordinarily perhaps haven’t voted, turned out,” he said. “We’ll need to reflect on the reasons why they turned out in the way that they did and why they voted in the way that they did.” While it didn’t surprise many to see the Conservatives lose their overall control of Trafford council, it had not been predicted that the Greens would land the final blow. Geraldine Coggins, one of two Green candidates to take seats of the Tories in Altrincham, said: The media hasn’t necessarily noticed, because we’re not very surprised. I spoke to a number of people in their 80s who said they had always voted Conservative but were going to vote Green for the first time in their lives, and a number of Labour members who said they were going to vote Green this time. There was a lot of momentum. Dan Jerrome, who came second in the last set of council elections in the area, said that it shouldn’t come as a surprise that Green party candidates could take seats from Conservatives. He said the pair – who are now Greater Manchester’s only Green councillors – had campaigned on a number of issues, but pointed to the council plans to chop down trees and large developments that residents felt they hadn’t been consulted on. On the BBC’s election programme Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, claimed a few minutes ago that Brexit was not a big factor in the local elections. He told the programme: I didn’t get from voters on the doorstep ‘Brexit, Brexit’. That just was not what was coming across. It was about local issues. But Fox had to be corrected by fellow panellists when he argued that, if Brexit was a factor, Labour would have done better in remain areas like Walsall at these elections. Walsall voted leave, he was told. Rob Ford, an academic and elections specialist, says Fox is just wrong. Labour have gained Plymouth from the Conservatives. That is the first council of the night that has switched from one party’s majority control to another’s. Here are the figures. Plymouth Lab gain from C Lab 11, C 8 Lab gain 4, C lose 4 New council: Lab 31, C 26 This is from the New Statesman’s Stephen Bush. Ukip have actually won a seat. This is from Chris Doidge from BBC Radio Derby. If the results in London are quite different from the results outside London (see 3.14am), then in many respects that’s just a repeat of what happened at the last general election. Overall there was a modest swing from the Conservatives to Labour in 2017. But the swing in London was much, much larger than anywhere else. Here is another chart from Britain Votes 2017. According to John Curtice at the BBC, as reported on the BBC blog, their analysis from key wards in London shows “a 1.5% swing from Conservative to Labour, far short of what Labour needs to pick up anything other than perhaps Barnet, but in contrast to the position outside of London where there is so far a 1% swing from Labour to the Conservatives.” Here is some comment on the Trafford result. (See 3.03pm) Tim Montgomerie, who founded the ConservativeHome website, wonders if there was an Andy Burnham effect. From Andrew Fisher, Jeremy Corbyn’s policy adviser From the Manchester Evening News’s Jennifer Williams The Conservatives have lost Trafford to no overall control. Here are the figures. Trafford C lose to NOC Lab 13, C 7, Green 2 Lab gain 4, Green gain 2, C lose 4, LD lose 1, Ind lose 1 New council: Lab 30, C 29, LD 2, Green 2 More from Wandsworth. This is from Matt Singh from Number Cruncher Politics. And this is from Marsha de Cordova, the Labour MP for Battersea. My colleague Ben Quinn has tweeted this from Wandsworth, which he says helps to explain why the Conservatives have fended off the Labour attack. On the BBC election programme Justine Greening, the Conservative former education secretary and MP for Putney, said that, after three bad years for her party in London, there were some signs of hope. She said: Labour were really trying to keep up, literally, the momentum. It doesn’t look to me - we’ve got lots of results to come through - like they’ve managed to do that. Maybe we are beginning to see something akin to peak Corbyn happening. The results are now in from 53 councils. And only three councils have changed hands. The Conservatives have gained Basildon and Peterborough - both from no overall control. And Labour has lost Nuneaton, which is now under no overall control. Here is another slug of results. I posted a large chunk of them earlier at 1.29am. Councils where control has changed Peterborough C gain from NOC C 7, Lab 6, LD 3, Green 1, Ind 1 C gain 1, LD gain 1, Green gain 1, Lab lose 1, UKIP lose 1, Lib lose 1 New council: C 31, Lab 14, LD 6, Ind 5, Lib 2, UKIP 1, Green 1 Councils where control has not changed. Havant C No change C 13, Lab 1, LD 1 C gain 2, UKIP lose 2 New council: C 31, Lab 2, UKIP 2, Ind 2, LD 1 Sefton Lab No change Lab 17, C 4, LD 2 C gain 3, Lab gain 3, LD lose 4, Ind lose 2 New council: Lab 43, LD 12, C 8, Ind 3 Fareham C No change C 12, LD 3, Ind 1 New council: C 24, LD 5, UKIP 1, Ind 1 Gosport C No change LD 9, C 8, Lab 1 LD gain 4, C lose 3, Lab lose 1 New council: C 18, LD 14, Lab 2 Dudley NOC No change C 14, Lab 10 C gain 6, UKIP lose 6 New council: Lab 35, C 35, UKIP 1, Ind 1 Wolverhampton Lab No change Lab 19, C 3 Lab gain 2, C lose 1, UKIP lose 1 New council: Lab 51, C 9 Portsmouth NOC No change C 6, Lab 4, LD 4 Lab gain 4, LD gain 1, C lose 2, UKIP lose 2, Ind lose 1 New council: C 19, LD 16, Lab 6, Ind 1 Wokingham C No change C 11, LD 4, Lab 2, Ind 1 Lab gain 2, LD gain 1, C lose 3 New council: C 42, LD 8, Lab 3, Ind 1 Rochdale Lab No change Lab 16, C 3, LD 1 LD gain 1, Lab lose 1 New council: Lab 46, C 10, LD 3, Ind 1 Ipswich Lab No change Lab 12, C 3, LD 1 Lab gain 1, C lose 1 New council: Lab 34, C 12, LD 2 Liverpool Lab No change Lab 25, LD 3, Green 2, Lib 1 LD gain 3, Lab lose 3 New council: Lab 76, LD 7, Green 4, Lib 2, Ind 1 Colchester NOC No change C 10, Lab 4, LD 2, Ind 1 C gain 2, LD lose 2 New council: C 25, LD 12, Lab 11, Ind 3 Newcastle-upon-Tyne Lab No change Boundary change Lab up 2, LD down 1, Ind down 1 New council: Lab 56, LD 19, Ind 3 Lincoln Lab No change Lab 7, C 4 C gain 3, Lab lose 2, Ind lose 1 New council: Lab 24, C 9 Hart NOC No change C 4, Ind 4, LD 3 Ind gain 3, C gain 1, R lose 4 New council: C 15, LD 8, R 6, Ind 4 Preston Lab No change Lab 13, C 5, LD 2 Lab gain 2, C lose 2 New council: Lab 35, C 17, LD 5 Chorley Lab No change Lab 14, C 2, Ind 1 Lab gain 2, C lose 1, Ind lose 1 New council: Lab 32, C 13, Ind 2 Sandwell Lab No change Lab 26 Lab gain 3, Ind lose 3 New council: Lab 70, Ind 2 Rugby C No change C 8, Lab 3, LD 3 C gain 1, LD gain 1, Ind lose 2 New council: C 24, Lab 9, LD 9 Tameside Lab No change Lab 17, C 2 New council: Lab 51, C 6 Stevenage Lab No change Lab 8, C 3, LD 2 LD gain 1, Lab lose 1 New council: Lab 26, C 9, LD 4 I’m at the count in Wandsworth where it looks increasingly like the Conservatives have held off the much talked about threat of a Labour takeover of a council that has been in Tory hands since 1978. Sadiq Khan, who is at the count in South London, has been playing down Labour’s chances not just of ousting the Tories in a local authority where the mayor’s party would need to take 12 Tory seats, but also making more widespread gains. “I’m looking forward to seeing the us making gains across London,” he said, when it was put to him by reporters that he and other Labour figures had “talked up” the possibility of winning Wandsworth. “Of course we may not win councils but I think winning councillors who are labour is a fantastic achievement.” A rank and file Labour activist put his feelings about the party’s chances in Wandsworth more bluntly: “Glum, I’m glum. It was just too big a mountain to climb.” Justin Greening, the Tory MP for Putney, said it appeared that the Conservatives have managed to “fend off” Labour. Turnout is meanwhile up in many wards here, and by as much as 10 percent in many cases. Matt Singh, who runs the Number Cruncher Politics website, reckons that people are making false assumptions about where the Ukip vote is going. John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, and others have been arguing that they are going in disproportionate numbers to the Conservatives. Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, has just told the BBC that his view is that Ukip voters are just returning to the parties they supported before they flocked to Ukip a few years ago. On the subject of what happens to the Ukip vote, it is worth flagging up this chart in Britain Votes 2017, a useful collection of essays on the general election published by the Hansard Society. In the main essay David Denver says that, overall, the decline in the Ukip vote benefited the Conservatives. But he also says that although people assumed that the Conservatives would benefit most in those constituencies where Ukip decided not to stand a candidate, actually the opposite happened and Labour saw their share of the vote rise the most. Here are the figures he cites to back this up. The results are now in from 43 of the 150 councils where there are elections. Here are the figures Conservatives Councils: 14 (+2 - Basildon and Peterborough) Seats: 241 (+45) Labour Councils: 23 (-1 - Nuneaton) Seats: 428 (-13) Lib Dems Seats: 65 (+8) Greens Seats: 7 (+1) Ukip Seats: 0 (18) Results are starting to come in thick and fast now. Here is a round-up from the Press Association. The Liberal Democrat leader of Colchester Council, Paul Smith, has lost his seat in St Anne’s and St John’s ward to the Conservatives, who are hoping to take control of the council. The Conservatives have gained control of Peterborough, winning seven of the 18 seats contested. It was under no overall control. The Labour target of Carlisle remains in no overall control. North East Lincolnshire will remain under no overall control after the results were declared in 12 of the 16 wards being contested. The council was a target for both Labour and the Conservatives. Conservative sources say they expect to remain the largest single party on Worcester City Council. The Green party look set to gain a seat from the Tories. Labour looks set to take Plymouth from the Conservatives, Labour Party sources say. The result at Winchester is too close to call, Conservative and Liberal Democrat sources say. The Conservatives currently have a narrow majority on the council, which is a Liberal Democrat target. On the BBC election programme John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, said that Labour was making “steady progress” but that “obviously we want to be doing better”. He said the Ukip vote had largely gone to the Tories. Sir Nick Harvey, the former Lib Dem MP, also told the programme that he thought the Ukip vote had gone to the Conservatives. Here is some reaction to the result in Swindon, where Labour gained one seat from the Conservatives, but the Conservative retained overall control of the council The Labour group leader Jim Grant said: I’m bitterly disappointed. We need to sit down and analyse the figures. Turn-out was up all round. We got as many votes as we thought we would need to win. Clearly the Conservatives were able to increase their vote. How I don’t know. It may be the collapse of the Ukip vote and that has gone back to the Tories. But we are still in the game here. The majority is reduced to one. Next year one last haul and hopefully we will break the Tory monopoly on control of Swindon borough council. Jeremy [Corbyn] has inspired our active base and that is why we have got so many votes. The Conservative group leader David Renard said: We got our positive message across. Labour ran a very negative campaign here. They have thrown a lot of resource, brought in a lot of people and spent a lot of money trying to take up to six of our seats. They failed to take every one. We have shown the Labour party is a long way from forming a government and on the doorstep there is a lot of anti Jeremy Corbyn feeling. There are very few places in southern England where Labour has a foothold. And this is from Robert Buckland, the South Swindon MP and solicitor general. Labour were expecting to take control or for their to be no overall control. They failed. It’s a very bad night for them and a really strong night for the Tories. Who’s doing well and who’s doing badly? This is what John Curtice, the leading psephologist, told the BBC a few minutes ago. The truth is, [all three main parties] are doing better than they were four years ago in terms of votes won. That’s a reflection of the fact that the Ukip vote is down. However John McDonnell’s problem is that the Conservative vote, at least in the votes that we have had so far, which are all from outside London, is going up more than the Labour vote. That therefore means that, relative to the Conservatives at least, Labour are in a somewhat weaker position than they were in indeed in 2014 when most of the seats were [last fought] ... That said, this ... is pointing to something like Conservative and Labour being equal, or probably the Conservatives being slightly ahead. This probaby does mean that the Labour party are in a stronger position than they were in the 2017 general election. But the truth is, in so far as the Labour party would like to be able to demonstrate further progress, to be able to say that actually we’re beginning to come up with the kinds of leads in the local elections that we normally associate with oppositions that are heading for victory, I think John must be somewhat disappointed. The Labour party, relative to the Conservatives at least, are going back as compared with recent local election performances. At a Momentum election night event, Labour canvassers are taking a rest after a long day of door-stepping. Laura Parker, the Momentum national co-ordinator, said the fact that the Tories seemed to be doing well in leave areas showed how divided the country was. She said: There’s a more profound fracture in British politics on leave/remain lines. It’s clear the Labour party have to continue building in areas over a long period of time that it’s lost. It’s almost certainly the case the Tories have the same problem in reverse - they will struggle in remain areas and big cities. This isn’t a healthy state of affairs. The distinguishing feature is Labour has a manifesto for the whole country, and of course expectations are high because we did so well in the general elections. But we’re comparing our results to 2014; there’s only so much we can gain. The Tories have had some of the worst few weeks on record; if I was the Tories I’d be talking up Wandsworth and Kensington too. Swindon is obviously disappointing. It’s a place we were hoping to do better in. It’s all relative, that’s the thing about local elections. One of the challenges for Labour is having a much bolder offering about local government but you can only do that when you’re in government. For the moment we’re mitigating the worst effects of austerity, which is a thankless task. Here are the results by council that are in so far, according to the Press Association. Councils where control has changed Basildon C gain from NOC C 11, Lab 2, Ind 2 C gain 5, Lab gain 2, UKIP lose 5, Ind lose 2 New council: C 24, Lab 11, UKIP 5, Ind 2 Nuneaton &amp; Bedworth Lab lose to NOC C 11, Lab 6 C gain 8, Lab lose 7, Green lose 1 New council: Lab 17, C 16, Green 1 Councils where control has not changed Tamworth C No change C 8, Lab 1, Vacant 1 C gain 2, Lab lose 1, Ind lose 1 New council: C 22, Lab 5, Ind 1, UKIP 1, Vacant 1 Thurrock NOC No change Lab 9, C 6, Ind 1 Lab gain 3, C gain 1, Ind lose 4 New council: C 20, Lab 17, Ind 12 Tandridge C No change C 4, LD 4, Ind 3, R 3 LD gain 3, Ind gain 3, R gain 2, C lose 8 New council: C 22, LD 9, Ind 7, R 4 Brentwood C No change C 8, LD 4, Lab 1 C gain 1, Ind lose 1 New council: C 25, LD 9, Lab 2, Ind 1 Wigan Lab No change Lab 18, Ind 4, C 3 Ind gain 3, C gain 2, Lab lose 5 New council: Lab 60, Ind 8, C 7 Cannock Chase Lab No change Lab 6, C 5, LD 1, Green 1 C gain 2, Green gain 1, Ind lose 2, UKIP lose 1 New council: Lab 21, C 15, Green 3, Ind 1, LD 1 Hartlepool Lab No change Lab 5, Ind 5, C 1 Ind gain 1, UKIP lose 1 New council: Lab 19, Ind 11, C 3 Swindon C No change C 9, Lab 9, LD 1 Lab gain 1, C lose 1 New council: C 29, Lab 26, LD St Helens Lab No change Lab 13, C 1, LD 1, Ind 1 Ind gain 1, Lab lose 1 New council: Lab 41, LD 3, C 3, Ind 1 Halton Lab No change Lab 17, LD 1 New council: Lab 52, C 2, LD 2 Castle Point C No change C 9, Ind 5 C gain 4, UKIP lose 2, Ind lose 2 New council: C 27, Ind 14 The Tories are also optimistic about seeing off Labour in Westminster, my colleague Pippa Crerar reports. Labour has conceded defeat in Kensington and Chelsea and said there is little chance of the party taking control of the council, despite the Conservative administration’s chaotic handling of the Grenfell Tower disaster. “We have piled up votes in Labour-held wards,” said Labour group leader Robert Atkinson, insisting his party’s gains would be limited because the Conservatives have managed to “frighten out” their vote across the west London borough. Kensington and Chelsea has been controlled by the Conservatives since the council was formed in 1964 and Labour went into this year’s election with just 11 out of 50 seats – all representing areas in the poorer, north of the borough near to the burned-out shell of Grenfell Tower. Last June’s catastrophe, combined with the unexpected victory of Labour’s Emma Dent Coad in the Kensington parliamentary constituency at the general election, prompted speculation that Jeremy Corbyn’s party could be on a cusp of an unlikely breakthrough. Instead Labour is hoping to gain just a handful of councillors, with hopes pinned on the Chelsea Riverside and St Helen’s wards. The Liberal Democrats are targeting a single ward, while the new centrist political movement Advance looks to have sunk without trace. Despite conceding defeat, Atkinson insisted the election showed how the Conservative council’s reputation has been hit by the disaster, even among core Tory supporters in ultra-wealthy parts of the borough. “Grenfell is a symbol of incompetence of the council,” he said. “I’ve heard that from Chelsea ladies who always thought they had an efficient council. But both during and afterwards the council has just failed.” Britain Elects has been calculating what has happened to the share of the vote so far. There has been a swing to the Tories, it says - about 2.5% since 2014. I’ve just been speaking to councillor Andrew Western, leader of the Labour group on Trafford council, who is quick to dismiss the idea that his party could win overall control of the borough. “That was never the plan. We never thought that we could go to overall control this year. Absolutely not,” he said. He went on: To be honest, I think the Tories were suggesting that by way of expectation management. But we never felt that we could take it this time. To win six seats [the number the party would need to take control] we would have to win three that we have never won in the history of Trafford. Even to go to no overall control we would have to win one seat in Davyhulme East that we’ve never ever won. So I would say that, for us, no overall control would be a tremendous result. It really would. Turnout in Trafford is slightly up on the last set of elections in 2016 – 42.9% (73,073 votes) compared to 41% (66,763) – something Western says is good for Labour. “I’d say we’re hopeful from the things that we’ve seen of picking up two or three seats, maybe, but it really is too early to tell.” Sean Anstee, the council’s Conservative leader, also said, unsurprisingly, that it was too early to make predictions. He said: We’ve seen a concerted effort from the Labour party, just as we’ve seen a concerted effort from our party. We’ll know later on tonight who’s has been successful. I think it is important for Greater Manchester [where Trafford is the only Conservative council] to have a diversity of political opinion. We can see in city regions across the UK, where they’re dominated by a single party, that that doesn’t bring the variety of ideas that you would really want to have. The Tories have sent out a briefing about Labour losing control of Nuneaton &amp; Bedworth. They point out that in 2014 Labour had a 22-seat majority there. And they point out that my Guardian colleague Owen Jones, a very active campaigner for Labour, once cited Nuneaton as the sort of seat Labour should win. Here are the latest figures from the Press Association, with the results in from 12 of the 150 councils. Conservatives Councils: 4 (n/c) Seats: 62 (+20) Labour Councils: 7 (-1) Seats: 110 (-16) Lib Dems Seats: 11 (+3) Greens Seats: 1 Ukip Seats: 0 (-5) My colleague Steven Morris has posted a picture of the Tories celebrating holding on to Swindon. The Conservatives have gained Basildon. This is from the BBC’s Nick Sutton. The Tories have held Swindon, the BBC reports. In a statement released tonight Sadiq Khan, the Labour mayor of London, said that for Labour to win Wandsworth would be beyond the party’s “wildest expectations”. He said: I’ve been campaigning across London and it’s quite remarkable to see us being competitive in boroughs that used to be “no go” areas for Labour in previous years. No more. It would be truly astonishing if Labour were to take control of Wandsworth council - which has been a flagship Tory council for forty years - and winning here is above even our wildest expectations. We last won here in 1974 ... In Wandsworth we stand a real chance of winning councillors in some wards that Labour hasn’t represented since I was born - but it would be a real earthquake if we were to win control of the council - above even our wildest expectations. Whatever the outcome here tonight, it’s clear that London has turned its back on Theresa May’s Government - who neither like nor understand Londoners, our values or our way of life. Britain Elects has the Nuneaton voting figures. The New Statesman’s Stephen Bush says these figures show why it is wrong to hold elections by thirds. Here are the Nuneaton &amp; Bedworth results from the Press Association. These are the seats that were up for election - not all the seats on the council. Con: 11 (+8) Lab: 6 (-7) Green: 0 (-1) According to the Press Association, results are now in from six councils. Con: 2 Lab: 3 (-1) NOC: 1 (+) The council that has changed hands is Nuneaton &amp; Bedworth, which has gone from Labour to no overall control (NOC). More on what the Tories are saying. Lib Dem sources say the party expects to make a handful of gains in Liverpool. This is from my colleague Pippa Crerar. Senior Labour and Conservative sources in Dudley, where either party could take control, say it is too close to call, the Press Association is reporting. Labour sources say it could come down to results in just two of the 24 wards being contested, Belle Vale and Wollaston &amp; Stourbridge Town. The Local Government Information Unit has a faster results service. The Press Association has posted the first full council result of the night. Broxbourne C No change C 9, Lab 1 C gain 1, Ukip lose 1 New council: C 28, Lab 2 The Tories are saying Labour has lost control of Nuneaton. And the party has tweeted this particular result. On the BBC John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, says it is going to be “a complicated night”. It might be “quite boring” too, he says - to protests from the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg. He says suggestions that Labour could make great gains were wrong. Relatively few councils are likely to change hands, he says. And he says it is not clear what will happen to the Ukip vote. He says at the general election two thirds of the Ukip vote went to the Conservatives, and only one third went to Labour. He says Labour’s focus is on making “incremental gains”. The Conservatives are doing well in Nuneaton, the BBC is reporting. Britain Elects has two of the ward results. Conservatives in Welwyn Hatfield could lose overall control, party sources have told the Press Association. These are from the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg. We’ve also got a byelection tonight in Northern Ireland. It was triggered by the decision of Sinn Fein’s Barry McElduff to resign as West Tyrone MP in January, 10 days after he provoked outrage by posting a video of himself with a Kingsmill-branded loaf on his head on the anniversary of the notorious Kingsmill massacre. McElduff had a majority of more than 10,000 and his Sinn Fein successor Orfhlaith Begley is expected to win. This is intriguing, from the BBC Essex reporter Charlotte Rose. Ukip are expected to struggle enormously tonight. In 2014 their national share in the local elections was put at 17% on the PNS measure. (See 11.46pm.) Those elections coincided with the European elections, which Ukip won. But since the party achieved its key aim, and secured a leave vote in the EU referendum, it has been in turmoil. One indication of this is how few candidates it has put up. The figures are in this chart, from John Curtice’s PSA briefing. It is hard to measure success in local elections because the seats and the councils where elections take place are not the same every year and therefore - as John Curtice pointed out in the briefing cited earlier (see 10.31pm) - the raw results can be misleading. But parties and their supporters will want to know who is doing well and who is doing badly. Here are three measures you can use, with the relevant benchmarks. Vote share After the local elections psephologists look at the vote share the parties achieve and use those figures to calculate what the vote share would have been if people had been voting in the same way across the whole of Britain. They do this by looking at the demographic make-up of the wards where people were voting and extrapolating a national figure, based on what is known about voting behaviour. Just to make things complicated, there are two versions of this figure. Curtice and his team produce one called the projected national share (PNS) which the BBC uses. And two other psephologists, Colin Rallings and Michael Thrasher produce one they call the national equivalent vote (NEV), which gets used by Sky. They tend to show the same trend, but the actual figures are not always the same. At some point on Friday we will get PNS and NEV figures for these elections. There are at least three figures you can compare them to. Vote share at the 2017 general election (for GB) Con: 43.4% Lab: 41% LD: 7.6% Vote share at 2017 local elections Con: 38% (PNS); 39% (NEV) Lab: 27% (PNS); 28% (NEV) LD: 18% (PNS); 18% (NEV) Vote share at 2014 local elections (when these seats last fought) Con: 29% (PNS); 30% (NEV) Lab: 31% (PNS); 31% (NEV) LD: 13% (PNS); 11% (NEV) Seats gained As Curtice explained (see 10.31pm), comparing seats gained and lost in one year with the seats gained and lost in another can be grossly misleading, because different numbers of council seats are up for election every year. The only comparison that is remotely half-fair is with what happened in 2014 - when most of these seats were last up for election - although even that is problematic, because the exact number of seats being contested is not the same. Council seats won/lost in 2014 Con: -236 Lab: +324 LD: -310 Another factor, obviously, if that Labour gained a lot of seats in these councils four years ago, it becomes much harder to gain more. Councils gained/lost The same point applies to comparing the number of councils gained/lost with the figures for 2014. But, for what they are worth, here are the figures for that year. Con: Net loss of 13 councils Lab: Net gain of 4 LD: Net loss of 2 No overall control: Net increase of 11 More from Swindon. These are from my colleague Steven Morris in Swindon. The excellent Britain Elects Twitter feed is posting ward by ward results. The first ones are in from Sunderland. The Lib Dems have also been on the phone. Party sources say that in London they’re “very confident” of taking Kingston-upon-Thames from the Tories, although the result won’t be in until tomorrow at around 5pm. However, they’re less confident about neighbouring Richmond, despite it being Sir Vince Cable’s own back yard, claiming it remains “on a knife edge”. They are fairly upbeat about their chances in St Albans and Eastleigh, but think it’s unlikely that they’ve been successful in winning Hull back from Labour. Labour sources say that they’re “hopeful” of making progress in the number of seats they pick up across the country but that the result will be “fairly tight” in several key places. They point out that the collapse of Ukip since 2014 creates an element of uncertainty, although in the general election two thirds of the ex-Ukip vote went to the Tories, and just one third to Labour. In London, they are keen to stress that the party was starting from a high watermark, having done so well four years ago, which would limit potential gains. Labour thinks they’ve got a “fighting chance” in Barnet, North London, citing public disquiet about outsourcing (but no mention of antisemitism) but are claiming they haven’t seen the swings they would need to take Tory “crown jewel” councils of Wandsworth or Westminster. In Kensington &amp; Chelsea, which always looked like a push (though nobody quite knows whether there will be a Grenfell effect) they suggested it was “out of reach”. But they’re more optimistic about wiping out the last remaining speck of blue - Trafford - in a sea of red councils around Manchester. However, they predict the town hall would go to no overall control, rather than a Labour win, but that would still be a “massive coup”. The final prediction from Labour sources for now: they’re “hopeful” of winning Plymouth from the Tories. According to Sky’s Faisal Islam, Survation have a telephone exit poll from Croydon (a Labour-run council, although one the Tories won in 2010) showing a big Labour lead. I’m at the count for the Trafford council elections at Lancashire County Cricket Club. The wealthiest of Greater Manchester’s ten boroughs is a key target for Labour and Jeremy Corbyn chose the Stretford sports village leisure centre, just across the road, to launch his party’s local election campaign in March. The Tories took overall control of Trafford in 2004, eight years after Labour won the borough in 1996 – a year before Tony Blair’s landslide election victory. If Labour manages to gain control tonight it will be seen as a promising sign for their electoral chances on a national level. Only a third of the council’s 63 seats are up for grabs and Labour would need to win six of the 13 non-Labour seats on offer, as well as retaining those it already has, to take the borough. The Conservatives currently hold Trafford by just two seats, so it would not be a surprise if the local authority slipped into no overall control. Labour locally has become increasingly confident since the 2017 Greater Manchester mayoral election, when Andy Burnham won 16,000 more votes in the area than his Conservative opponent Sean Anstee, leader of Trafford council. Voters in Trafford also backed remain in the previous year’s EU referendum, something the Labour MP for Stretford and Urmston, Kate Green, says comes up on the doorstep. Labour’s campaign has focused on the three key wards of Davyhulme West, Davyhulme East, and Flixton, which – if won – would strip the Tories of their overall control. The party also thinks it has a shot at wealthy Altrincham. Locally Labour has pledged to maintain low council tax rates (which are currently the lowest in Greater Manchester), build social housing, block development on green belt land and stop further council outsourcing. Some assorted election chat. From Sky’s Faisal Islam From the Sun’s Tom Newton Dunn Swindon is hugely significant to Labour. Jeremy Corbyn, Tom Watson, John McDonnell and Momentum activists have all visited the Wiltshire town during this campaign to lend a hand to grassroots members. At general elections, Swindon is seen at a bellwether – whoever holds the two seats tends to win power. If Labour does well here tonight, it will also be seen as a sign that the party can make in-roads across the south of England. Since Gordon Brown’s defeat in 2010 both North Swindon and South Swindon have been held by the Tories. Its council has been run by the Tories since 2004. Labour had high hopes of wresting back control in 2014 but its campaign was not helped when Ed Miliband embarrassingly failed to recognise the name of the Labour group leader – Jim Grant. Grant still heads the group. His party’s Swindon manifesto was a solid, no-nonsense affair, promising more council houses, reopening children’s Sure Start centres, boosting regeneration of the town centre, promoting the living wage, tackling zero hour contracts. It also vowed to keep the Lydiard country park and house under council ownership and management. The park hit the headlines in the Swindon Advertiser this week when a cabinet member revealed that visitors who wanted to enjoy a cream tea at the cafe have to order it two days in advance. Here’s the maths for Swindon. There are 57 councillors on Swindon borough council. Going into the count, 30 were Tory, 25 Labour and two Lib Dem. Nineteen seats are up for grabs – 10 Tory, eight Labour, one Lib Dem. Labour had high hopes in five seats – four of them Tory and one Lib Dem – including Lydiard and Freshbrook, where park management and cream teas is an issue. On election night you need Sir John Curtice. The great psephologist will be on the BBC’s election programme later but, in case you can’t wait, here is some YouTube video of a briefing on the local elections organised by the Political Studies Association on Monday. It is “rather anoraky”, as he says himself. (But we like that here.) The briefing was intended for journalists and Curtice said that he wanted to explain various aspects of the election in the hope of ensuring certain trends do not get misreported on Friday. There was a danger that headlines could be “seriously misleading”, he explained. Curtice said that it was important to remember that London was not representative of England or Britain as a whole. Literally 42% of the all the seats that are up for grabs on Thursday are located in London. And one thing, therefore, you absolutely have to get into your head is that London does not constitute 42% of England. If, as I’m going to argue, the result in London might prove to be different from that in the rest of England, headline totals of seats won and lost may seriously misrepresent the actual position of the political parties ... There is every reason to anticipate ... substantial divergence between remain and leave voting Britain, which therefore means that London is likely to move towards the Labour party but the rest of England could still swing towards the Conservatives. And therefore do not be surprised if, on Friday afternoon, you end up with the BBC coming up with a projected national share that actually has the Tories slightly ahead, even though they may have lost more seats and be losing ground in London. Crucial point, therefore; just remember, the tally of seat gains and losses is potentially seriously misleading because of the dominance of London. But Curtice also said that, just because it would be hard for Labour to win councils in London, that would not necessarily mean it was not winning votes. Equally, and conversely, the Labour party just picking up Barnet will not necessarily tell you the Labour party has not made progress in London. The Labour party’s misfortune, in terms of council control, is that there isn’t very much for the party to pick up. The polls have now closed and officials are just starting the process of collecting, verifying and counting the votes that will elect more than 4,000 councillors in 150 councils in England. Most of these seats were last up for election in 2014, when the poll coincided with the European elections, which saw Ukip win a nationwide election for the first time. In 2015 the local elections took place on the same day as the general election, and in 2017 they were staged in the middle of a general election campaign. And in 2016 the local elections overlapped with elections to the Scottish parliament, the Welsh assembly, the Northern Ireland assembly and for the mayor of London. But this year we’ve just got local elections basic. It will be the least consequential local elections day for at least five years. And I’m afraid it is not as if these are make-or-break contests for any of the major political leaders. At Westminster expectations are relatively muted and tonight’s results are not expected to lead to repercussions that could challenge the leadership of either Theresa May or Jeremy Corbyn. We may be wrong (we often are), but journalists are not expecting any of the main parties to suffer an all-round disaster. But don’t head for bed yet. This blog operates on the firm basis that there is no such thing as a dull election and tonight will be no exception. Politics matters. And this is the biggest test of political opinion in England since last year’s general election. It is also worth remembering that more than 4,000 people will be elected to office. Local government is not a glamorous calling, but it is important and worthwhile and good luck to those who win. There will be a lot of focus on London tonight because all 32 boroughs in the capital are having “all-out” elections (which means all seats are up for election, not just one third of seats, as is the case with most of the other council elections today.) The 1,833 London seats that are up for grabs comprise 42% of all seats being contested this year. The others are in 34 metropolitan districts, 67 shire districts and 17 unitary councils. There is a guide here. In addition there are four London mayoral elections - in Hackney, Lewisham, Newham and Tower Hamlets - as well as mayoral elections in Watford and for the new Sheffield city region. I’m Andrew Sparrow and I will covering the results as they come in through the night, as well as bringing you reaction and analysis. My colleague Jamie Grierson will be taking over after dawn, and then we will be carrying on until all the results are in on Friday evening. Here is the blog we were running earlier covering events on polling day.
3||Laughing all the way to the bank? The banks are – with impunityIt’s been a good week for the Commonwealth Bank. Shares closed on Friday at $72.76, up a tidy 2% for the week, and its core home loans business is set fair. Its small army of shareholders, the cherished mum-and-dad investors, can rest easy. Hang on a minute though. The Commonwealth? Isn’t that the bank that was described this week by the regulator as having a top-to-bottom management culture that is complacent, insular and incapable of learning from its mistakes? It is. And isn’t it also the bank that lost the details of up to 20m accounts but didn’t tell anyone? Correct. And, just to get this straight, isn’t it also the bank exposed by the royal commission as having charged fees for financial advice to dead people, in one case for a decade? Right again! So why haven’t the shares crashed? The fact is investors don’t care about what happened at the bank a couple of years ago – the shocking data loss happened in 2016, for example, so in the view of financiers it’s old news. Shares in the Commonwealth – in common with all banks – have had a bit of a kicking in recent weeks, falling from the mid-$80 range to the low-$70s. In the market jargon, therefore, the downside has been priced in. Sign up to receive the latest Australian opinion pieces every weekday The mortgage business is a key consideration here. The outlook is still rosy for a division that supplies the bulk of Commonwealth’s very healthy annual profits of almost $10bn. ANZ said recently the percentage of bad loans had fallen, boosting the outlook for other banks. Also, the Reserve Bank kept rates on hold again this week, meaning that any possible rise in borrowing costs, and therefore a squeeze on mortgage holders, still looks a long way off. Looking at the bank’s shares from the big end of town on Friday, you could argue that the only way is up. Despite all the bad news, the behemoth of Australian business continues to steam ahead. It remains, by some margin, the country’s biggest company by market value – worth around $130bn at the close on Friday. For perspective, that is a few billion more than Wesfarmers, Woolies and Telstra put together. The other three big banks – Westpac, ANZ and NAB – are also among the country’s top five companies. The only non-bank in there is BHP, so it’s hard to avoid the conclusion that the economy has been completely captured and is dominated by the interests of financial services. Another factor in this serene progress is that no one wants to believe Australia’s prudential regulator when it says the country’s biggest company is run by a bunch of smug, incompetent people who only care about their next bonus. The evidence from the royal commission and the Apra report – that the industry is out of control and staffed by sales people who are prepared to trample all over customers to bump up their commission – is damning. You might think the obvious conclusion – and one probably being drawn by voters, judging by Scott Morrison’s increasingly panicked-looking public utterances on the banks – is that things have gone fundamentally wrong with our financial services industry. Instead, any old explanation will do. Most risibly, some said there were too many inexperienced women at board level. Catherine Livingstone, Commonwealth’s chair, might be many things, but she’s not wet behind the ears in business, having been the boss of the fantastically successful ear implant firm Cochlear. Others said the real problem is that the Commonwealth was owned by the state some time back in the last century. Most hilariously, Tony Abbott reckons the banks have spent too much time focused on social issues like gay marriage instead of red-blooded pursuits like making stacks of cash. You can laugh about it, but the unwillingness to accept the scale of the problem is no joke. Ever since they escaped the global financial crisis unscathed, a myth of invincibility has grown up around Australia’s banks. Even Peter Costello thinks that now. Profits have soared and, as manufacturing and retail struggle, the banks make up almost one-third of the value of the stock market. They were said to be well managed and well regulated, but the work of Kenneth Hayne and his commission has shown that’s not true. The scary bit is that the royal commission highlighted mainly the bits that Morrison and Asic allowed us to see – terrible tales of people being lent far too much money and bad advice in the banks’ wealth divisions. A succession of middle managers have been put through the wringer by the commission counsel, Rowena Orr, while the people who are ultimately responsible for the lax standards and shoddy treatment of customers – the chief executives and board members of the banks – have not been held to account. Only a royal commission with its terms redrawn to look at the industry from the top down will finally allow us to see the whole picture. • Martin Farrer is a Guardian editor
13||From Tinkler turbulence to triumph: Newcastle jets into a new eraHistory will be made at McDonald Jones Stadium on Saturday night when the first grand final of any national sporting code is held in Newcastle. Australia’s seventh largest city will see its flagship side, the Jets, come up against the A-League’s biggest and most successful club, Melbourne Victory. It’s David v Goliath. But it’s a storyline the Novocastrian community is distinctly familiar with. Competing with the big boys and fighting against richer opposition is part of the area’s sporting DNA. For decades long-suffering Hunter football fans have been used to mediocrity and disappointment. For years their best players, from Ray Baartz to Craig Johnston, were snapped up by cashed-up rivals or lost overseas. The introduction of the National Soccer League in 1977 did little to stop that trend. Despite a promising early start KB United collapsed in 1984. The NSL licence was taken over by local side Adamstown Rosebud but they only lasted two years. The Newcastle Breakers sprung to life in 1991, they but went under in 2000 after failing to reach a single finals series. Clayton Zane knows the boom-bust cycle better than most. A local junior, he played for the Breakers before going on to a career in Europe and for the Socceroos. Since 2011 he has been part of the Jets’ coaching staff. “The clubs have yo-yoed. We’ve had clubs in, they’ve fallen out of the league. No one’s ever doubted the community, the problem’s been the sustainability of the clubs and building a future so that we can stay in the league.” Sign up to receive the latest Australian sports stories every day The Breakers were reborn as Newcastle United, under eccentric owner Con Constantine, and in the 2001-2002 season United amazingly finished second, and the following campaign they finished fourth. When the A-League was launched in 2005 they renamed themselves the Jets and were one of only three NSL clubs to survive through to the new competition. Newcastle’s early A-League years were promising – second in the debut season, third in 2007 and then culminating in fourth place in 2008 and a maiden grand final appearance. After 23 years of trying, and failing, a national football club from the Hunter had reached a major final and they didn’t waste the chance – upsetting Central Coast 1-0 at the Sydney Football Stadium. However, that breakthrough was short-lived and they soon reverted to type. The squad was picked apart and the club finished with the wooden spoon the following season. A year later Constantine was stripped of the club’s licence and mining magnate Nathan Tinkler took control. “We just never recovered,” Jets fan Todd Blackwell says. “They ran out of money and all the drama involved with that. Then trying to talk Tinkler to getting involved, which was good for a while because of the low ticket prices. But he never even wanted the Jets. He wanted to get to the Knights.” The Tinkler era started promisingly – as history shows in all of the billionaire’s acquisitions – but eventually ended in debt-laden disaster. In five controversy-filled years the Jets churned through five coaches, numerous officials, and too many players, including marquees, to count. The club never finished higher than seventh and eventually Tinker’s turbulent rein ended in May 2015. “There was a lot of wasted money,” Zane says. “I’m sure if they had their time again they would do things differently. There was a lot of excitement in what they were trying to do, but they never fulfilled their ambition.” The trust of the community and the fanbase had almost completely eroded under Tinkler and the average attendance dropped by almost 4,000. They had finally hit rock bottom. The Jets were on FFA-administered life support for a season until Chinese businessman Martin Lee took over in 2016. However, that first season ended in failure, with another wooden spoon collected and another coach in Mark Jones sacked. Some local supporters wondered if the club and region was cursed. But a fairytale began on 7 October, 2017 with a 5-1 round one demolition of the Mariners. A combination of canny recruitment, a revitalised roster, community engagement and brilliant coaching by veteran Ernie Merrick led the Jets to second place in the regular season and an unlikely spot in the grand final. One way or another, that fairytale will reach its conclusion on Saturday. But regardless of the result, Newcastle has a team it can be proud of once more. No longer is the club the laughing stock of the A-League. Plans are already in place to make sure the Jets’ turnaround is not a flash in the plan like a decade ago. For once the club is on firm footing heading into the future. “Everyone wants the fairytale to end with us winning the game, but I think it’s bigger than that,” Zane says. “The club’s turned its fortunes around. We’ve hopefully learnt our lesson from the Tinkler era. The support base is back on board again and this season can be a major catalyst for us moving forward. Players want to come and play for the club now. “Everything’s shaping up beautifully but we can’t let this season go to waste, we need to build on it.”
15||Royal wedding  could give £80m lift to Britain's economyThe royal wedding could provide a shot in the arm of more than £80m for the country’s slowing economy as retailers, pubs and hoteliers look to cash in on Harry and Meghan’s looming nuptials. The tourist authority VisitBritain said about 50,000 Americans were expected to be among the crowds lining the roads in Windsor and soaking up the atmosphere in the capital when Prince Harry and Meghan Markle tie the knot later this month. Pubs have been given special permission to stay open late while retailers in London’s shopping district are anticipating a £60m mini sales boom on the back of tourist spending sprees. “There could be a modest boost to GDP growth in the second quarter from the royal wedding and the football World Cup starting in mid-June,” said Howard Archer, chief economic adviser to economic forecasting group the EY Item Club. “There may well be a temporary boost to retail sales from people buying souvenirs and also to tourism.” Airbnb said that with around 42,000 guest arrivals expected in London, hosts were set to rake in £12m from renting out their properties. In Windsor residents can earn £353 from the wedding weekend alone by using Airbnb to let their properties. The couple’s decision to get married in the grounds of Windsor Castle had also turned Slough, Maidenhead and Reading into rental hot spots, the company said. With pub landlords given special permission to stay open until 1am on the eve of the nuptials, as well as on the day itself, the British Beer &amp; Pub Association thinks the extended trading hours could deliver a £10m sales boost. “Relaxed licensing hours for pubs will be welcomed by pub-goers and provide a real boost to the pub trade,” said Brigid Simmonds, chief executive of the BBPA – which represents the owners of 20,000 pubs. The wedding clashes with the FA Cup final between Manchester United and Chelsea, but while the wedding kicks off at noon the action does not start at Wembley until teatime – avoiding potential tussles over the big screen. Tim Martin, chair of JD Wetherspoon – which runs nearly 900 pubs, is less optimistic that the wedding will be good for business. “No disrespect to Harry and his missus but I can’t see the royal wedding moving the dial for the pub trade,” he said. “The public wish them all the best, but I feel the nuptials’ significance is overplayed.” There is optimism that the good weather ushered in by the bank holiday will hang around for the next fortnight: 19 May is too far away for the Met Office to have honed its forecast, but it warns that “confidence for a continuing warm dry spell is low” on its website. Online gambling firm Betway is offering odds of 100/1 that the mercury will hit 100F (37.7C) on the big day. The country’s beleaguered retailers have been limbering up for the event since the engagement was announced at the end of last year with merchandise running the gamut from twee £12 tea-towels at John Lewis to Argos’s £14.99 rip-off of Markle’s engagement ring in cubic zirconia rather than diamonds. Markle has also been boosting the fortunes of British fashion retailers by mixing high street names such as Marks &amp; Spencer and Jigsaw into her designer wardrobe for public engagements. The big supermarkets are also expected to benefit as Britons host street parties and use the event as an excuse for a get-together. It is not clear how many street parties are taking place nationwide but the figure is likely to be in the hundreds, with Hertfordshire county council alone reporting 51 applications. VisitBritain said the pomp and pageantry associated with the royal family was part of the country’s appeal to overseas visitors, with the bride’s nationality an added bonus because American visitors are the UK’s highest spending overseas group. “We are looking at it as a showcasing moment on TV stations around the world,” said VisitBritain director Patricia Yates. “Our history and heritage is a huge draw internationally and this is an opportunity to reach a younger audience with a contemporary story.”
13||Advantage Cardiff but Fulham still hope Reading can lend a handThree weeks ago Slavisa Jokanovic joked that Cardiff City, his main rival for promotion, would drop points against Reading on the final day. As that fixture arrives, he is not about to change his mind. “Why am I not going to be positive?” the Fulham manager said before this crucial Championship weekend. “Why am I not going to believe Reading will win the game? From my side, it’s a human thing to do.” Just in case he appeared too confident, Jokanovic also described Neil Warnock’s side as having “one and a half feet in the Premier League”. Cardiff are a point ahead of Fulham, with an inferior goal difference, and if they beat Reading at home on Sunday lunchtime they will secure automatic promotion behind Wolves. If Fulham achieve a better result at Birmingham than Cardiff manage, it will be a different story. For the Serb, everything is still in play. “I was asked many months ago where we were going to finish in the Championship,” Jokanovic said. “I still have the same answer: everything is going to be open until the end.” His original prediction was prompted by Warnock, who had offered the teasing thought that Fulham might drop points against Sunderland. In the end Fulham snatched a 2-1 win through Aleksandar Mitrovic last Friday, but Cardiff kept their noses in front thanks to a comfortable win at Hull. “We knew many months ago Wolves would be promoted,” Jokanovic said. “They are living a different dream. But I am surprised with Cardiff, if you want, because at the beginning of season I didn’t see they would be the team with one foot and a half in the Premier League.” The Bluebirds went up as champions in 2012-13 with 87 points, one fewer than Fulham’s total now. Jokanovic’s team could end up in the play-offs, despite being unbeaten in the league in 2018. Jokanovic has the tricky task of trying to maintain confidence that events may turn in Fulham’s favour while also making sure it does not drain away should his team need the play-off route instead. His approach is to remain phlegmatic. “Sometimes 87 can be enough, sometimes it’s not,” he said. “Our unbeaten run is incredible but it’s not important. It’s an interesting statistical detail. We have improved greatly in these past months though; we have shown the character to go and win games. I don’t know why we would change now. We have played many finals in the last few months, it’s another final for us and there’s a possibility we might have another two or three finals after this.” He puts the Cottagers’ improvement down to a strong January window when they brought in the full-backs Cyrus Christie and Matt Targett alongside Aleksandar Mitrovic. The on-loan Newcastle forward has scored an invaluable 14 league goals, while borrowing Targett from Southampton has allowed Ryan Sessegnon to move up from defence and in the process become the division’s player of the season. “Playing Sess further forward was a nice thought earlier in the season but I didn’t have the opportunity,” Jokanovic said. “With Matt and Aleksandar they make the first team better but also push another part of the team. Since January we have been still more competitive, still more solid and more clinical. If you compare the first half of the season to the second, it’s not hard to see the reasons for our improvement.” Fulham are “the Manchester City of the Championship”, according to Warnock. “They have a lovely style but then you see they have gone 24 games unbeaten and that we are still above them. Nobody mentions our run but we have not had a bad one either. I’m sure they wish we were not here.” And so after 4,050 minutes of league football it comes down to the final 90. Jokanovic is confident regardless of the outcome. For Warnock, he happily admits to feeling the tension. He holds the joint record of seven promotions in English football along with Dave Bassett, Jim Smith and the late Graham Taylor. “I have had nerves since I was at Gainsborough Trinity,” Warnock said. “I think the difference is the opportunity to create what I have always been looking for really – that eighth promotion.”
13||Top-four spot is ‘massive’ progress for Liverpool, says Jürgen KloppJürgen Klopp believes if Liverpool can secure a Champions League berth for a second successive season it would show “massive” progress. Back from their qualification in Rome for the Champions League final, Liverpool are at Chelsea on Sunday needing a point to secure a top-four finish. Asked what it would mean to qualify for Europe’s premier club competition for a second year running for the first time since 2009, Klopp said: “It would be massive. It was actually the main target we had at the start of the season. You want to be champions but it was clear after a few months that would not be possible. “The target is qualifying for the Champions League. That would be a big success. With the group we’ve got, with how we came to the final and playing with the biggest intensity, being ready again, then the injuries we had, it would be a massive success. “It’s exactly what we want. You cannot plan for a Champions League final obviously. Nobody thought about that at the start of the season. Of course we wanted to go as far as possible but my main target was the top four. We worked hard for that and now we want to bring it over the line. “If we do it, it would show everything but it’s still an if. I don’t like the word ‘would’ too much. Let’s talk about it when it happens. We have to play football games to make that happen.” Liverpool defeated Roma 7-6 on aggregate having eliminated Manchester City, the Premier League champions, 5-1 in the quarter-finals and Klopp believes the European Cup and domestic campaigns have battle-hardened his players. “They have developed a lot,” he said. “It’s been a difficult season for a lot. Individually there have been struggles here and there but we have really stayed strong in our relationship and remained on track. Without that we couldn’t be here. Third in the league and in the Champions League final. That wouldn’t be possible. “It’s all about the players and what they did so far is absolutely exceptional. The problem is that Sunday is also important.” Klopp welcomed how the challenge becomes tougher as Liverpool become more successful. “That’s absolutely true,” he said. “It’s the situation we’re in. We brought ourselves into it in a positive way. “In a negative way we brought ourselves into it by not winning the three league games against Everton, West Brom and Stoke. If we had won them, it would have been slightly different at least.”
13||Everton’s Allardyce defends style and points to Tosun and Walcott signingsSam Allardyce has defended his style of football in the face of criticism from Everton fans, arguing he cannot be accused of negativity when he has brought in two key attackers. The manager has a contract at Goodison Park until the end of next season, though some fans have been vociferous in their disapproval of the type of football being played, even though Everton have climbed to eighth in the table. “I know I have a label in football, my reputation precedes me but it is simply not true that I always play the same way,” Allardyce said. “They are saying negative football now but we have bought Cenk Tosun and Theo Walcott. Cenk is a goalscorer, which is the hardest thing to find in football, and Theo has got tremendous pace, an area where we were lacking. I’ve won money at some of my previous clubs betting with the press officer about how soon the question about my style of football will arise. Quite often it will be in the first minute but I’ve known it happen in under 30 seconds. I don’t bring the same style from club to club, I try to adapt to what players we have and what they are capable of.” Allardyce met Everton’s major shareholder, Farhad Moshiri, last week following a request by the manager for clarification over his future after criticism from some sections of supporters. The pair discussed pre-season and the 2018-19 campaign and the former Bolton, Newcastle, England and Crystal Palace manager claims plans are in already place for player recruitment over summer. “The small minority usually makes its voice heard in our game,” he said. “We’ve obviously got room to improve, but you can’t let criticism affect your focus. You have to carry on with what you believe in and try to make everyone happy. The level of the team has improved consistently in the last months, that’s why we are where we are in the league. We have got ourselves into a very favourable position. I’d like to win our last two matches, beginning with our last home game [today] against Southampton, and then take the improvement into next season. Our pre-season plans are all in place, what happens in terms of recruitment is another matter. It is a volatile market and you have to wait and see what is available and whether anyone comes in for any of your players.”
0||Tony Bellew says David Haye will ‘pay for every word’ in grudge rematchThe conversation with Tony Bellew was idling towards an emotional conclusion as he reflected on what mattered to him in life: family, home, friends, Everton Football Club. And then the fighter detailed in a chilling blast of invective what he was going to do to David Haye at the O2 Arena in London on Saturday night. “I want to cause havoc,” he said, eyes on fire. “I want to cause mayhem – and I mean the worst mayhem you can see. Something happens to me [in the ring]. I’m gonna flick a switch. I want to do damage. I swear when I get him on Saturday, he’s going to pay for every word. I’m going to smash him. And I’m not going to stop. He’s finished. He has no idea what’s coming. “I know what I’m capable of. I’m a horrible fucker when I’ve got boxing gloves on. I’ve let sparring partners off the [hook] so many times in this camp. I’ve wobbled them, rocked them. Without being big-headed I could have rendered every single sparring partner unconscious if I chose to. I’ve been that sharp and that vicious. I’m telling you now, Saturday I will knock the shit out of this fella. I will take him out and it’s going to be horrible. That’s not nice. I just wish this fucking anger and rage would go, but it won’t.” It was a tirade only a fighter could properly defend, or understand – and it sounded so much like Haye in his pomp. Moments earlier, Bellew had spoken with quiet sorrow about the death of his brother-in-law, Ashley, who fell to his death from a balcony on a family holiday in Cancun last August. “What my family’s been through I can’t even put into words. We’re very close. It’s really, really hard. It’s in my thoughts, when I’m sitting here. I think about Ashley’s mum and dad. I really do.” He spoke, too, about how his 12-year-old son was being ragged at school before the first fight, taunted that his father was going to be knocked out. “Our Corey likes to think he can have a fight, the fact is he couldn’t fight sleep. He’s a lovely looking boy. Looks just like his mother, a handsome kid. I wouldn’t be fighting if I had his looks when I was a kid.” Friday’s weigh-in passed without incident, although they managed a few ritual verbals. Away from the microphone, Haye whispered to Bellew: “I’m going to take my time with you. I’m going to chop you down. It’s going to be slow and painful. I’m going to make sure you suffer.” Haye looked his body-beautiful self at 15st 10lb, a stone lighter than 14 months ago. Bellew weighed just over 15st, three pounds lighter than in March 2017. The numbers that will count will be heavy blows landed, and Haye reckons his new Cuban coach, Ismael Salas, has fixed a long-standing fault in his footwork that will enable him to get more leverage on his already awesome punches. “I fought like a lunatic in the first fight. All the shots I was missing are going to be landing. Ismael has rewired my legs,” Haye said. “In the first fight – and even in the two previous fights – my legs weren’t connected. He’s noticed that. This is the best I’ve felt in 10 years. A lot of operations, a lot of punches in that time. But it feels right – and it will feel very wrong for Tony.” While Bellew has raged this time, Haye has gone for an almost super-soft approach. He has praised his conqueror repeatedly, only to be rebuffed. Bellew, a master of intransigence, picks at his ego, agreeing with nothing, arguing over nothing too. “In all honesty he’s a proper gobshite,” Bellew says. “I think he’s a tit. He’s got a mask on. He’s doing really well hiding his feelings and emotions. Why is he having to answer to me, a little fat Scouser? It shows how far back he’s gone. It infuriates him that I’ve got any kind of demands at all over him. “He knows he can’t say all the things he said last time because the media won’t absorb it. I’m not here for the media. I’m not here for the public. I’m here because this is my job. I just tell the truth. Some people don’t like it. Some people do. I’m just telling you exactly how I feel.” Bellew is scornful too that Haye is still fighting six years after he said he would be out of the business at 31. “Why can’t he just be honest and say: ‘Listen, I’ve earned £20m, I’ve pissed it up the wall, I’ve gone through a few things and I need to get more money.’ Just be humble and say it. I wouldn’t be fighting. My legacy is secure. I don’t give a shit if everyone remembers me or not. That’s what these fights are about. Money. Don’t get me wrong: I want to win, and I’ll do whatever it takes. But I know what I’m saying: he’s back for money.” Haye’s response was quick and quiet. “People have been saying that for years.” For the only time in his career, Haye has been out-talked this week. As Salas says: “Actions speak louder than words.” And there will be more of the former on Saturday night, with the latter reserved to announce the winner. I expect that to be Haye, pushed near to the limit over 12 rounds, and maybe persuaded that, finally, he has survived long enough in this business.
13||Brighton 1-0 Manchester United: Premier League – as it happenedMore from Jose: Having told Geoff Shreeves that he thinks some of his players don’t care whether Manchester United finish second or third in the league, he seems to single out Marcus Rashford for a bit of a roasting. “People always ask ‘Why always Lukaku? Why always Lukaku? Why also Lukaku?’. Well, now they know why always Lukaku? And why always this player and why always that player.” Jose Mourinho speaks: “It was not good enough,” he tells Sky Sports. “The players that replaced others didn’t perform at a good level. When individuals don’t perform at a good level, it’s difficult for the team to perform at a good level. My players will tell you that before the match I knew what was going to happen and I told them. At half-time I knew what was going to happen. I knew it and I told them.” Dominic Fifield was the Guardian’s man in the Amex Stadium press-box to see Brighton secure their safety with a win over Manchester United. Here’s his on-the-whistle report. Chris Hughton speaks: Speaking to Kelly Cates and Gary Neville on Sky Sports, the Brighton manager says he thought every one of his players was “brilliant” tonight. “Every now and again you get one of those performances where he rises above his natural level,” he says of Anthony Knockaert. “He’s a player for the big arena.” He also says that he knew his teamwould be able to compete in the Premier League this season after seeing them play in their first three or four games. A lap of appreciation for Brighton: Brighton’s players, backroom staff and assorted wives, girlfriends and children come out to take the applause of their fans after securing their Premier League status for another season. Two years ago the clubs stood for the first time on the same rung of the footballing ladder but next season Wimbledon will look down on MK Dons from League One Anthony Knockaert speaks: “The effort from the boys all night was magnificent,” he says in an interview with Sky Sports. “That’s a night we’ll remember all our lives because to stay up at home against Manchester United is a special feeling.” Pascal Gross speaks: “I’m not sure,” he says, when he’s asked if he thought his header crossed the line. Some post-match reading: Barney Ronay has been musing on Real Madrid, Cristiano Ronaldo, what a “much-cherished colleague” I am (although not necessarily much cherished by me) and how wrong he was for dismissing my theory that Spurs are mentally week in a recent episode of Football Weekly. Read on ... Fun fact: Brighton central defender Shane Duffy holds the record for the number of headed clearances in a Premier League season with 221 and counting. Fun fact: Manchester United have now lost away from home to all three promoted sides this season. They also lost to West Brom, who might well be relegated tomorrow. Stay tuned for post-match reaction and our report from the Amex Stadium. Just 28.3 millimetres - that’s how far over the line Pascal Gross’s headed goal went over the line, according to the good folks at HawkEye. At the final whistle, the music from the Great Escape blared out over the tannoy as some of Brighton’s players were mobbed by a handful of pitch invaders. All involved are delighted with themselves. Defeat for Manchester United doesn’t really amount to a hill of beans, but Jose Mourinho looked decidedly unimpressed with his team’s dreadful performance tonight. It will be interesting to hear his post-match musings. Peep! Peep! Peeeeeep! It’s all over and Brighton have won on the back of an outstanding performance. Manchester United made life fairly easy for them with a dire collective performance, but Brighton deserve no end of credit for this win. They’ll be playing Premier League football agains next season. 90+3 min: “We are staying up!” chant Brighton’s supporters. It’s quite an achievement for the Seagulls and one few thought they’d pull off. That said, if Manchester United are the second best team in England, it speaks volumes about the quality of the 18 teams beneath them. 90+2 min: Brighton substitution: Leonarodo Ulloa on for Glenn Murray, who’s been terrific tonight despite not getting the goal his performance deserved. 90 min: There’ll be another four minutes of this dross. Without wanting to tempt fate, Manchester United look like they could play for another four hours and not score. They have been spectacularly awful tonight and it would be a travesty if Brighton left this pitch with anything less than three points for a well-earned win. 88 min: Brighton substitution: Solly March on for Jose Izquierdo, who leaves the pitch with the assist for Pascal Gross’s goal to his name. 86 min: Jessie Lingard misses a sitter under pressure from Shane Duffy, who slides in to challenge as the substitute looks certain to finish an incisive attacking move. 83 min: Paul Pogba unleashes a speculative shot from distance, but it fizzes over the bar. Brighton substitution: Pascal Gross off, Beram Kayal on. 81 min: Brighton fans mark the 80th minute with sustained applause for their club’s president, Dick Knight, whose birthday it is today. “Happy 80th birthday, Mr President!” reads one banner that’s unfurled, while a number of fans can be seen wearing slightly sinister Dick Knight masks. 79 min: A delivery across the edge of the Brighton penalty area by Juan Mata drops for Anthony Martial, who catches it on the valley. The sarcastic cheer from Brighton fans tells you all you need to know. 77 min: “If United continue like this for the next 15 minutes, [Jose Mourinho] won’t have to explain to anyone who’s been given a chance tonight why they’re not playing the FA Cup final,” says Gary Neville in the Sky gantry as Brighton continue to turn the screw. “He can just make them watch the video of this match.” It’s certainly not one I’d like to have to sit through again. 75 min: Anthony Martial attempts to curl the ball around Ryan’s outstretched arm and into the top corner, but the ball floats narrowly wide. It was a decent effort. Manchester United substitution: Marcos Rocco off, Scott McTominay on. 72 min: Cutting in from the left, Izquierdo tries to tee up Dale Stephens on the edge of the penalty area, but his pass is cut out and Manchester United clear their lines. Scott McTominay is readying himself on the touchline and about to enter the fray for Manchester United. 72 min: Mat Ryan saves two long range efforts in quick succession, the first from Marcus Rashford, the second through a thicket of bodies from Jessie Lingard. 70 min: Knockaert, who has been excellent, tries to play Jose Izquierdo in behind with a long punt into space behind Ashley Young. The Manchester United left-back has the legs on the Colombian and gets back to tidy up. 69 min: Manchester United double-substitution: Jessie Lingard and Luke Shaw on, Matteo Darmian and Marouane Fellaini off. 68 min: Juan Mata takes the free-kick, but curls his effort over the cross-bar. 67 min: Pascal Gross is booked for a shove on Juan Mata on the edge of the Brighton penalty area. Free-kick for Manchester United on the right side of the D. 66 min: The ball falls to Izquierdo, who drives a low, rasping shot a couple of feet wide of the left upright. 64 min: Brighton drive forward with Knockaert on the ball, taking on and beating all comers. Just inside the Manchester United penalty area, he gets the ball stuck under his feet, but Glenn Murray takes over. His shot goes out for a corner. 62 min: Brighton appeal for a penalty when Knockaert goes down under a challenge from Anthony Martial in the penalty area. Pawson looks to his linesman for advise, but appears to get none. Replays of the incident prove fairly inconclusive. 61 min: Bruno is played in behind the Manchester United defence but his attempted pull-back across the area is blocked by Rojo. 60 min: Brighton lead as they attempt to beat Manchester United for only the second time in their history. There was an element of good fortune about their goal, which almost certainly wouldn’t or couldn’t have been given without goal-line technology. Pascal Gross gets on the end of a Jose Izquierdo cross and heads goalwards at the far post. Marcos Rojo appears to perform miracles to acrobatically clear the ball off the line, but seconds later, referee Craig Pawson consults his goal-line technology gizmo and awards the goal. Brighton lead and it’s no more than they deserve. Meanwhile in tonight’s Scottish Premier League play-off ... 53 min: Knockaert advances through the centre and unleashes a shot that screams over the bar. Brighton are awarded a corner as the ball appeared to graze the shirt of Chris Smalling on the way out of play. 51 min: In the Sky commentary gantry, Gary Neville is complaining about Marouane Fellaini dropping too deep and being unable to influence the game. He needs to let Matic do that and get further forward where he can influence play, is the gist. 49 min: Manchester United work the ball over and back across the field with a series of neat, short passes. They eventually tee up Paul Pogba for a shot, who threatens to wrong-foot Mat Ryan with a low drive towards the near post from the edge of the area. The Brighton goalkeeper gets down to make the save. 47 min: Glenn Murray is shown a yellow card - the first of the evening - by referee Craig Pawson for a hack on Marouane Fellaini. 46 min: Brighton get the second half started, still needing three points from their remaining games to absolutely guarantee their Premier League safety. Strangely, Jose Mourinho has elected not to replace any of the players who were so awful in the first half. He had no shortage to choose from. A fairly dull first half draws to a close. It’s scoreless at the AMex Stadium and, while they can be pleased with their night’s work so far, Brighton will be disappointed not to have taken advantage of Manchester United’s lethargy. Jose Mourinho is clearly furious with his team’s performance, so I’d say we can expect changes in personnel after the break. 44 min: bong returns to action as Ryan boots the ball downfield and out for a United throw-in. There’ll be one minute of added time before what looks like an incandescent Jose Mourinho lacerates his players in what I suspect will be the mother of all dressing-room rants. Anthony Martial and Marcus Rashford have been particularly atrocious, while I’d forgotten Juan Mata was on the pitch until he got a mention from Sky co-comms man Gary Neville a few moments ago. United’s front trio are not alone in having failed to impress - Dale Stephens has Paul Pogba in his pocket, while David De Gea is arguably the only United player to have emerged with any credit. 43 min: The ball is arced in again, half-cleared and Mat Ryan claims confidently under pressure. There’s a break in play as Gaetan Bong gets treatment for a foot injury. 41 min: Marcus Rashford wins a corner for his side as half-time approaches. The ball’s floated in to the penalty area and promptly goes out for another corner off the head of Lewis Dunk, who is tasked with marking Marouane Fellaini. 38 min: Marcus Rashford chases a ball into space down by the corner flag, prompting Mat Ryan to dash out of his penalty area. The players collide, the ball goes out of play and Rashford appeals for a free-kick in the area between touchline and penalty area. He doesn’t get one and smacks the ground in frustration. 37 min: Marcos Rojo larrups the ball forward from the left-back position, but Shane Duffy is on hand to head it back from whence it came. He’s looked solid as rock tonight. 35 min: Knockaert plays Pascal Gross in behind the Manchester United defence, but the Brighton winger is unable to dink the ball over De Gea from a tight angle. Brighton win a corner, from which nothing comes. On the touchline, Mourinho is going into meltdown mode, scarcely able to believe how badly his team is performing. It’s difficult to blame him - they’re getting progressively more inept at the very basics as the half progresses. 30 min: According to Geoff Shreeves, Sky’s man on the touchline, Jose Mourinho is furious with Marcus Rashford for not squaring the ball for Anthony Martial a couple of minutes ago. During the most recent break in play he made his fury known in no uncertain terms, taking the player to one side and giving him a rollocking. If this is Rashford’s audition for a place in the FA Cup final starting line-up, it’s not going too well. 28 min: A corner for Brighton after David De Gea is forced to tip a Jose Izquierdo drive from distance over the bar. The ball’s floated in to the penalty area and flicked towards the far post, but Glenn
10||California's economy passes UK's to become world's fifth biggestCalifornia’s economy has surpassed that of the United Kingdom to become the world’s fifth largest, according to new federal data made public on Friday. Despite having a population of only 40 million compared with the UK’s 65 million people, California’s gross domestic product of $2.7tn has overtaken the UK’s $2.6tn. The so-called Golden State’s GDP rose by $127bn in the period from 2016 to 2017, while the UK’s economic output fell slightly over that time when measured in US dollars, due in part to exchange rate fluctuations. British GDP has fallen steadily from $3tn in 2014, according to World Bank figures. The release of Friday’s data demonstrated the sheer immensity of California’s economy, home to a thriving technology sector in Silicon Valley, the world’s entertainment capital in Hollywood and America’s “salad bowl” in its agricultural heartland. It also reflects a substantial turnaround since the recession that followed the financial crisis of 2008. California’s economic output is now surpassed only by the total GDP of the United States, China, Japan and Germany. All economic sectors except agriculture contributed to California’s higher GDP, said Irena Asmundson, chief economist at the California department of finance. Financial services and real estate led the way, with $26bn in growth, followed by the information sector, which includes many technology companies, at $20bn. Manufacturing was up $10bn. California last had the world’s fifth largest economy in 2002 but fell as low as 10th in 2012 following the great recession. Since then, the largest US state has added 2 million jobs and grown its GDP by $700bn, now contributing a little over 14% of the US economy despite having 12% of the US population, according to state economists. California’s strong economic performance relative to other industrialized economies is driven by worker productivity, said Lee Ohanian, an economics professor at University of California, Los Angeles.
0||Harvey Livett treble decisive as Warrington see off Leeds in thrillerThere have been enough false dawns over the last 63 years, so Warrington fans will not be getting carried away just yet. But these are perhaps the nights which should give the greatest hope to their supporters that a first championship since 1955 may not be beyond the Wolves this season. With this, their ninth successive victory in all competitions, comes not only a five-point cushion between themselves and Leeds - down in fifth as the stuttering defence of their title continued with their third defeat in four games – but a firm belief that the Wolves can last the pace this season. Three months ago, these two sides met on the opening night and the size of the task Steve Price faced in transforming a Warrington side who chronically underperformed last year was laid bare. Now they are the form side in the competition and appear to have all the hallmarks of a side who, under Price’s stewardship, are going places. Here, they led 11-4 at half-time before a remarkable turnaround from the reigning champions made it 22-11. Perhaps last year’s Warrington would have folded; Price’s did not. Four tries – including three in eight minutes – secured the most significant win of Price’s reign so far. “We’ve had a number of good wins where we’ve been front-runners, but this one was especially pleasing,” he said afterwards. The star here for Warrington was the young utility, Harvey Livett, who scored three superb tries and created another; it may yet earn him a new deal, too. “Hopefully we sort that out shortly,” Price said of the future of the 21-year-old, who is out of contract in November. Livett’s clever kick enabled Kevin Brown to break the deadlock, before he touched down alongside Tyrone Roberts’ drop goal to open up a seven-point half-time lead for the hosts. Leeds’ only points of the first half came via Ashton Golding’s try, but they were architects of a remarkable turnaround after the break. After Joel Moon and Ryan Hall scored exceptional team tries, Carl Ablett then put the hosts two scores ahead; but that merely riled the visitors. First, Ryan Atkins touched down Brown’s kick before Livett completed his hat-trick with two tries in four minutes. They were both created by magnificent breaks from Stefan Ratchford, the outstanding Warrington fullback: and he was pivotal in the try which sealed the game with two minutes left, as Ben Murdoch-Masila scored.
13||Pascal Gross gets Brighton across the line against sloppy Manchester UnitedBrighton have enjoyed plenty of giddy highs since their restoration to the top division last summer but this was a victory to cap them all. By securing a first win over Manchester United in 36 years Chris Hughton’s team are safe. The wave of relief that swept round the Amex at the final whistle swiftly turned to raucous delight. There will be top-flight football in Sussex by the sea for another year. This was a glorious way to achieve a season’s objective, a success achieved as Pascal Gross’s header crept exactly 28.3mm over the goal-line before Marcos Rojo could hook the effort away, and one to be savoured through the delighted din of the players’ post-match lap of appreciation. Gross was outstanding, as he has been for much of his first season in England since joining for £3m after Ingolstadt slipped out of the Bundesliga. The German’s determination to reach José Izquierdo’s centre, which had flicked off David de Gea’s glove into a muddle of bodies off the far post, summed up the home side’s urgent desire to secure safety, even if their goal celebrations were briefly delayed until the referee’s watch had buzzed. Albion’s run-in had always looked daunting, with trips to the Premier League champions and Champions League finalists to come in the final week. Yet by winning for the first time since early March and discomforting United all night, they have quelled fears of a late sting in the season’s tail. “It’s a relief because I felt we’ve deserved to stay in this league for our season’s work,” said Hughton. “If we’d lost today and the next two and somehow gone down, it would have been a real feeling of injustice. Normally when you win this type of game it’s because you’ve played at a good level and maybe your keeper has had to make some good saves or they’ve missed some chances. But United didn’t have a clear-cut chance in the 90 minutes. We were good value for the win.” That was an understatement. Brighton’s attacking approach play had been more assured and incisive all night, led by Izquierdo and Anthony Knockaert, who tends to rouse himself for occasions such as these. The hosts’ back-line was obdurate and organised, their midfield industrious and energetic and neither of United’s centre-halves ever appeared at ease in trying to combat the splendidly awkward Glenn Murray. De Gea’s stunning first-half save denied the striker from distance. Izquierdo would be thwarted in similar fashion before José Mourinho could haul his players back into the dressing-room for a dressing-down. This is the first time United have been beaten at the three promoted teams in a top-flight season and, while they are still likely to finish second, few of those offered chances to impress will, on this evidence, now merit inclusion in the FA Cup final line-up. The Portuguese was a picture of disgust through most of the first half, eventually retreating from his technical area as if to distance himself from such a mess of a performance. Where Albion were urgent and energetic, the visitors were horribly slack. Simple passes were repeatedly guided out of play, team-mates delivering blindly and misreading colleagues’ runs, their wavelengths forever scrambled. Sloppiness infected the visitors’ approach, with Marcus Rashford and Anthony Martial, players for whom there has been a clamour for greater involvement, either too anxious to impress or too rusty to do themselves justice. In the end the injured Alexis Sánchez and Romelu Lukaku actually emerged with their own reputations enhanced in absentia. Both will hope to be fit for the game at Wembley against Chelsea. United’s best opportunity was spurned as the final whistle approached, Rashford flicking a return pass inside for the substitute Jesse Lingard just inside the penalty area, only for the former Brighton loanee to skew his shot wide as Shane Duffy dived in to challenge. Mourinho had made a beeline for Hughton on the touchline as soon as the chance was missed, offering him a hug of congratulations. The United manager had seen all this coming, as he admitted post-match, but had been helpless to prevent the reverse. Brighton boasted all the motivation and, in the end, could lose themselves in delirious huddles as the ecstatic home support itched to invade the playing surface to join them. This was their night.
10||Donald Trump brags of achievements and promises NRA: I'll defend gun rightsDonald Trump attempted to issue a rallying cry to Republicans with a wide-ranging political stump speech at the annual NRA meeting in Dallas on Friday, making clear he would fight November’s midterm elections with a staunch defense of gun rights. “We cannot get complacent,” Trump said. “We have to win the midterms.” Though hundreds of thousands of Americans marched for stricter gun laws after the Parkland school shooting, the only march that matters is “the march to the polls on election day”, a defiant Wayne LaPierre, the NRA’s executive vice-president, told NRA members. He announced that the group now had “approaching 6 million active members”. Election day 2018 is “the march for our freedom”, LaPierre said, to a roar of support from the audience. Less than two months ago, school shooting survivors organized hundreds of thousand of Americans at hundreds of protests across the country in what they called a March for Our Lives. Though Republicans have majorities in both houses of Congress, Trump said that was not enough to pass the legislation he wanted. Increasing Republican representation in Congress in November’s midterm elections was essential. Trump said he was warned earlier: “‘You know, going to the NRA convention and speaking today, that will be very controversial, it might not be popular.’ You know what I said? ‘Bye-bye, gotta get on the plane.’ You have to do the right thing.” “We’re all fighting battles, but I love fighting these battles,” Trump said, to cheers, after a long description of what he called the “witch-hunt” of the investigation into Russian election interference and links between his campaign and Moscow. An enthusiastic crowd repeatedly delivered standing ovations as Trump praised his policy accomplishments, and discussed low unemployment, his praise from Kanye West, and his negotiations with North Korea. “Weakness gets you nuclear war,” Trump said, to cheers. “That’s what gets you nuclear war.” More than 70,000 NRA members were expected to attend the convention. But the event also drew protests, including one staged by Manuel Oliver, the father of one of the 17 people shot dead at a high school in Parkland, Florida, in February. Before Trump’s speech – as the president told reporters on Air Force One he had attracted a “record crowd” – and after, NRA leaders expressed fear of such post-Parkland activism. “What they really want is for you to be afraid to publicly associate with this organization,” Chris Cox, the NRA’s chief lobbyist, warned the auditorium early on Friday afternoon. “They don’t want you to go to a Friends of NRA dinner. They don’t want you wearing an NRA hat or putting an NRA sticker on your car or truck. In the face of their bitter hatred, there has never been a more critical time for us to stand tall.” It was a strikingly defensive note for a leader of an organization that has played offense for years, railing against Democratic politicians, liberal billionaires and the Hollywood stars who advocate for gun control, even as it has succeeded in blocking any stricter federal gun laws. LaPierre, the NRA’s brash leader for decades, also described the NRA as under attack in a new way. “The fact that you’re all here means you must have missed the news. Haven’t you heard the NRA’s in big trouble? We’re finished? We’re on the run? We’re losing?” LaPierre asked the crowd. “If we’re so dead, why are so many thousands of you here in this hall right now?” LaPierre claimed that the NRA’s membership had grown even as gun control advocates said they were attracting bigger groups of local activists after the Parkland shooting, and hundreds of thousands of protesters seeking gun control laws massed in Washington DC and across the country. “The NRA’s membership is at an all-time high, approaching 6 million active members, and thousands more are joining every day,” LaPierre said. “We’re growing more powerful at a record rate.” The gun rights group, which does not provide independent verification of its membership numbers, has previously claimed “more than 5 million members”. “They gaslight tragedy,” LaPierre said of the NRA’s opponents, who now include grieving teenage survivors and parents of victims of a recent school shooting. “They exploit victims to advance their ultimate agenda: kill the NRA and napalm the second amendment right out of existence.” On Friday, Trump greeted a cheering Texas crowd with a fond “we love you”. He made no reference to his previous remarks supporting gun control measures. “Your second amendment rights are under siege but they will never ever be under siege as long as I’m your president,” he said. After Parkland, Trump suggested in a public meeting that he would support gun control measures. He also publicly warned lawmakers in early March that they should not be afraid of the NRA. “Some of you people are petrified of the NRA,” Trump said. “You can’t be petrified.” Some gun rights supporters saw the remarks as a betrayal. After a private meeting a day later, Cox tweeted that the president and Vice-President Mike Pence did not in fact support gun control. Gun control laws were futile, Trump argued, pointing to a terror attack carried out with guns in Paris, in a country with strict gun laws. “You know what?” he asked. “We are going to have to outlaw immediately all vans and all trucks, which are now the new form of death for the maniac terrorists … so let’s ban immediately all trucks, all vans, maybe all cars. How about cars? Let’s not sell any more cars.” Trump reiterated his support for arming teachers and hardening schools, although he said he was concerned about fortifying schools so intensely that even law enforcement officials might find it hard to get inside. Pence, in his address, said more to acknowledge the toll of American gun violence. “We live in a time when mass shootings have claimed hundreds of lives … shocking the conscience of our nation,” Pence said. “We will not rest and we will not relent until we end this evil in our time.” But he also blamed the media for distorting the gun debate by focusing too much on a “few villains” rather than the “many heroes” who use their guns to prevent violence. “Start telling the whole story to the American people about firearms in this country,” Pence said, to sustained applause. “We should be a nation that recognizes the people who save lives much more than the people who take them.” He reassured NRA members that they were “one of the most potent forces for good in the United States of America”. Trump echoed that line. “The people in this hall have never taken our freedom for granted,” he said, “and you have never stopped fighting for our beloved constitution. Incredible people, thank you.” “One more time for the media who thinks we’re down and out,” Cox said to the cheering crowd as Trump left the stage, and they roared.
8||Weatherwatch: ​why does Antarctic ice melt in the depths of winter?Scientists have long known that the amount of ice in the Antarctic is steadily decreasing. They were surprised, however, to discover recently that up to a quarter of the melting occurs in the depth of winter, when the average temperature is 15C below freezing. The melting is caused by a phenomenon called the föhn effect. The föhn or foehn wind was first noted in the Alps, and occurs when a wind blowing over mountains descends on the far side. The increase in pressure at lower altitude causes the mass of air to warm up by about one degree per hundred metres. Such a wind blowing down from a high mountain range can easily rise above freezing. The Chinook wind in the Rocky Mountains is sometimes called “snow eater” for its capacity to strip snow from the slopes. The winter Antarctic ice melt was discovered by a team led by Peter Kuipers Munneke of Utrecht University, using data from satellites and unmanned weather stations. It was presented to the European Geosciences Union in Vienna in April. The Antarctic has the highest elevation of any continent, and consequently fierce föhn winds. The new results show that these hot winds are making a significant contribution to ice melt.
16||Lib Dems mount mini fightback in local electionsLiberal Democrats pulled off a string of surprising victories in Thursday’s elections, netting three councils from the Conservatives, as the party’s leader, Sir Vince Cable, said experts had “underestimated” his party’s resilience. It won two key councils in south-west London, building on gains in last year’s general election in Richmond and Kingston. Both are heavily pro-EU areas and the Lib Dems will have benefited from their ultra-remain stance. The bar for success was low with the seats last contested in 2014, the year Lib Dem staffers often characterise as their lowest ebb. The party, then in coalition with the Conservatives, lost 310 council seats. A year later, the parliamentary party faced near wipe-out. Seizing back Kingston, which was lost in 2015, will be a significant morale boost. The Lib Dems took 39 seats, a gain of 21 councillors, pushing the Conservatives back to just six. Richmond has been a frustrating patch for the Lib Dems in recent years. The party ousted Tory MP Zac Goldsmith at a 2016 byelection, which he called in protest against the government’s Heathrow decision. But just seven months later, Sarah Olney lost to Goldsmith by 45 votes. On Friday, the Lib Dems were back in the ascendency, with the Conservatives reduced to seven councillors from 39. Cable’s party also made granular but significant inroads elsewhere, including some shock gains in Hull, ousting three long-serving candidates in all-Labour wards. It held Sutton council in the face of a ferocious Conservative campaign, as well as Eastleigh and Cheltenham. In South Cambridgeshire, a heavily remain area, Lib Dems took the council from the Conservatives. Senior Lib Dem sources had been questioning the effectiveness of Cable in recent months, fearing the veteran politician had failed to make the inroads necessary to kickstart the party after disappointingly limited advances in June. Cable said the party had shown “we can win anywhere”, pointing at wins in Liverpool, Sunderland and Gosport, “in both leave and remain areas.” “These results show a return to three-party politics and a strong future for the Liberal Democrats,” he said. “We stand as the only party fighting for an exit from Brexit, and are making gains against both a Conservative party driven by their right wing, and a leftwing Labour party absorbed by Corbyn’s dated economic vision.” Ed Davey, the Kingston and Surbiton MP, who won the seat back for the Lib Dems last year after losing in 2015, said it had been a “brilliant night” for his party. “We might end up winning more councils net from the previous position than any other party,” he said. “This looks like a real fightback for the Liberal Democrats.”
2||Corrections and clarifications• We referred to “six prizes established by Alfred Nobel”. Five prizes – in chemistry, literature, peace, physics, and physiology or medicine – were established by the will of the Swedish scientist (1833-96) and first awarded in 1901. A sixth, in economics, was created in memory of him by Sweden’s central bank and first awarded in 1969 (Nobel literature prize for 2018 may be postponed, 28 April, page 36). • Other recently corrected articles include: The new food: meet the startups racing to reinvent the meal
8||Suicidal refugee child should not be sent back to Nauru, psychiatrist saysA psychiatrist has said an acutely unwell child held within Australia’s offshore detention regime should not be returned to Nauru because his long-running detention there is causing his mental illness. The 17-year-old boy, who Guardian Australia will refer to as Hamid, is currently on the island of Taiwan, where he was taken, along with his mother, for health treatment. Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon Guardian Australia has reported on the treatment of his mother, Fatemeh, who was flown from Nauru after a delay of 18 months, for a heart operation. She has been treated on Taiwan. Hamid, who had been held on Nauru since he was 11, was suffering from acute and worsening depression on the island. Since being taken to Taiwan with his mother he has had a number of meetings with a psychiatrist at the Taiwan Adventist hospital. The psychiatrist has said he should not be sent back to Nauru. “The depressive symptoms were not improved, moreover, he had persistent suicide ideation and some organised plans,” the latest psychiatrist’s report says. “I have already prescribed antidepressant for him and told his mother, who is also a patient with major depression, to accompany him. “After discussing with the patient, his mother and their case manager, I think the environment in Nauru is [not only] not helpful with his depression, but even the trigger of his depression.” The doctor’s finding – that the fact of being held on Nauru indefinitely is contributing to, and even causing, Hamid’s mental distress – has caused significant consternation within the Australian Border Force and Department of Home Affairs. Taiwan was chosen by Australia as a suitable third country to which people held on Nauru could be sent for medical treatment largely because it was outside the protections of the refugee convention and the reach of Australia’s courts, while still providing high-level care. Most asylum seekers and refugees brought to Australia for health treatment win court injunctions preventing their return to offshore processing centres in Nauru or Papua New Guinea. But the mental health of children still held on Nauru – most have been there five years – has reached “crisis levels”, sources on the island say. Lawyers have been forced to take individual cases to court in order to have children moved. Three preteenaged children, suffering acute mental illnesses and having made repeated suicide attempts, have been urgently brought to Australia but only after court action was launched in Australia to have them moved. In two of the three cases, the Australian government opposed the children’s transfer in court. The government lost both, and acquiesced to the third transfer. Nauru sources say there is growing criticality of child mental health issues, with some influenced by the condition and actions of others. “It’s an epidemic: the risk is so serious,” a source from the island told Guardian Australia. About 142 refugee and asylum seeker children are held on the island. Psychological reports, prepared over months, and for different children, have argued that the fact of incarceration on Nauru – many children still live in tents inside the “open” regional processing centre and do not attend school – is causing severe depression that cannot be effectively treated on the island. The Australian government’s health contractor IHMS has conceded in court there is no child psychiatrist permanently based on Nauru, and that the standard of care is inadequate. Child psychiatrist reports provided to Guardian Australia have charted the decline of Hamid’s mental health on Nauru. The reports say he was initially achieving well at school but began to deteriorate after several years in detention and has declined precipitously in recent months. He has, reports say, a “profound sense of hopelessness” and “a high level of suicidal ideation”. Over the course of his time on Nauru, Hamid has received mental health treatment of poor quality, with reports copied from earlier information, and recommendations for specialist treatment not followed up. Several psychiatrists have warned Hamid’s condition would deteriorate without intervention. “I would predict that [he] would continue to deteriorate in terms of his mental state and function. It is highly likely that he will become more acutely suicidal. “He is a young man who is extremely hopeless and despairing – these aspects highly increase his risk [of] harm to himself and should not be underestimated. Even if [he] does not end his life then it is likely that he will endure many of these symptoms for a long time if he does not receive the appropriate treatment.” Fatemeh fled Iran in 2013 following a violent family breakdown that forced her to abandon her job and possessions, and leave the country with her son. Hamid was then aged 11. The uncertainty over their futures has cruelled her and her son’s mental health, Fatemeh told Guardian Australia. “I have been officially accepted as a refugee, but still live in a tent. If I was a imprisoned as a criminal in a third-world country, that government would provide me with basic facilities. “My son says to me, ‘let’s attempt suicide together’. He believes the only way to freedom is in death. I have sympathy for all the mothers and their children who live in Nauru. We are preyed upon and our lives are subjected to cruelty.” Hamid and his mother were flown to Taiwan on 9 March. Fatemeh has received treatment for her heart condition. It is unclear whether and when they will be returning to Nauru. Guardian Australia has approached the Department of Home Affairs for comment on the family’s case but has not received a response.
8||Iowa's Republican governor to sign law banning abortion at six weeksIowa’s Republican governor, Kim Reynolds, said on Friday she plans to sign a bill banning abortion after just six weeks of pregnancy, a move that would make the state the most restrictive in the nation. The legislation will almost certainly draw a swift court challenge and the move sets the scene for another lengthy legal battle as anti-abortion lawmakers ultimately eye the landmark Roe v Wade 1973 supreme court ruling that legalized abortion in the US. Reynolds has declared herself “proud to be pro-life”. Her announcement on Friday came shortly after the Iowa affiliates of Planned Parenthood and the American Civil Liberties Union warned that they would sue her if she signed the bill. The Republican-controlled state legislature passed the bill on Wednesday and sent it to the governor’s desk. “We will challenge this law with absolutely everything we have on behalf of our patients because Iowa will not go back,” said Suzanna de Baca, chief executive of Planned Parenthood of the Heartland. The legislation has propelled the state to the front of a push among conservative statehouses jockeying to enact the nation’s most restrictive regulations on the procedure. The bill would ban most abortions once a fetal heartbeat is detected, which is around six weeks of pregnancy. Similar legislation passed in other states did not go into effect after they were challenged in court over their constitutionality. Critics say the so-called “heartbeat” bill would ban abortions before some women even know they are pregnant. A federal appeals court three years ago struck down similar legislation approved in Arkansas and North Dakota. Backers of the legislation are optimistic about an influx of right-leaning judicial appointments under Donald Trump. “We created an opportunity to take a run at Roe v Wade – 100%,” said the Republican Iowa state senator Rick Bertrand of Sioux City after the bill passed. In March, Mississippi banned abortion after 15 weeks, sparking an immediate court challenge by reproductive rights advocates. A similar court challenge is under way in Kentucky, which in April enacted a ban on a common abortion procedure from the 11th week of pregnancy.
10||Stormy Daniels scandal: Trump says Giuliani yet to get his 'facts straight'Donald Trump on Friday sought to distance himself from comments made by Rudy Giuliani about the Stormy Daniels scandal. In freewheeling remarks to reporters as he left Washington to speak at the National Rifle Association in Texas, the president also reiterated his willingness to speak to special counsel Robert Mueller, who is investigating Russian election interference and links between the Trump campaign and Moscow. Mueller has indicted four former Trump aides. Giuliani, a former mayor of New York City, joined the president’s legal team last month. In interviews this week, he raised questions about Trump’s own comments about the $130,000 payment that Michael Cohen, Trump’s personal lawyer, paid to Daniels, an actor in adult films. Speaking to reporters on the south lawn of the White House on Friday morning, Trump said Giuliani “started yesterday … he’ll get his facts straight”. He added that “virtually everything said has been said incorrectly” about the payment to Daniels. Cohen, the subject of FBI raids last month, has insisted he paid Daniels, who claims to have had a sexual encounter with Trump, solely from his personal funds and in order to silence her and protect Trump’s reputation on the eve of the 2016 election. Questioned by reporters on Air Force One in April, Trump denied any knowledge of the payments. In an interview with Fox News host Sean Hannity on Wednesday night, though, Giuliani contradicted Trump and said the president reimbursed Cohen. Giuliani said the money was “funneled through the law firm and the president repaid it”. In a second interview with Fox News on Thursday morning, Giuliani seemed to confirm that the timing of the payment was tied to the 2016 election. “Imagine if that came out on 15 October 2016, in the middle of the, you know, last debate with Hillary Clinton,” he said on Fox &amp; Friends. Trump did not contradict Giuliani in a series of tweets on Thursday. In stilted and legalistic prose, he wrote: “Mr Cohen, an attorney, received a monthly retainer, not from the campaign and having nothing to do with the campaign, from which he entered into, through reimbursement, a private contract between two parties, known as a non-disclosure agreement.” Trump added that “these agreements are … very common among celebrities and people of wealth”. On Friday, Trump said: “Rudy is a great guy ... he’s working hard, learning the subject matter. He is a great guy.” He added: “He started yesterday. He’ll get his facts straight. It’s actually very simple, there has been a lot of misinformation really.” Speaking to reporters again by Air Force One at Andrews air force base, Trump said: “When Rudy made the statements … Rudy’s great and Rudy had just started and he wasn’t totally familiar with everything.” He added: “We love Rudy. He’s a special guy.” He also insisted he had not changed his story about the payments to Daniels. “Excuse me, excuse me,” Trump said. “You take a look at what I said. You go back and take a look. You’ll see what I said.” On Friday afternoon, Giuliani tried to walk back some of his remarks. In a statement, he said: “There is no campaign violation. The payment was made to resolve a personal and false allegation in order to protect the president’s family. It would have been done in any event, whether he was a candidate or not.” He added: “My references to timing were not describing my understanding of the president’s knowledge, but instead, my understanding of these matters.” The contradictory statements nonetheless add to the peril posed to Trump by his alleged assignation with Daniels, which the actor has said happened in 2006. In its raid on Cohen’s office in April, the FBI seized documents related to the payment. At the time, Trump called the raids “an attack on our country”. He later conceded, in a Fox interview, that Cohen represented him “like with this crazy Stormy Daniels deal”. But he had still not admitted any knowledge of it. About speaking to Mueller, Trump said on Friday: “I would like to speak because we’ve done nothing wrong.” But he also noted that his lawyers did not want him to do so, and outlined his oft-repeated belief that the investigation is “a pure witch-hunt” carried out by “all Democrats”. Giuliani’s comment to Hannity that Trump fired FBI director James Comey because Comey would not confirm that Trump was not the subject of investigation over Russia also caused widespread comment on Wednesday. Giuliani, Trump said, “knows it’s a witch-hunt, that’s what he knows. Rudy knows it’s a witch-hunt.” Trump was also asked about progress on his planned meeting with Kim Jong-un. “We’re having very substantive talks with North Korea and a lot of things have already happened with regard to the hostages,” he said, referring to three Americans held in the country. “I think you’re going to be seeing very good things.” Trump also appeared to suggest a date and location for his meeting with Kim had been set. The United Nations, meanwhile, said on Friday UN aviation agency directors will visit North Korea next week to discuss a request by the country to open new air routes to South Korea.
14||Jamie Acourt arrested in Spain over suspected drug dealingOne of Britain’s most wanted fugitives has been arrested in Barcelona by officers investigating suspected drug dealing, police have said. Jamie Acourt, a former suspect in the original Stephen Lawrence murder inquiry, faces extradition proceedings in Madrid. On Friday evening, Scotland Yard said Acourt had been arrested by Spanish police acting on the Met’s behalf after an operation that also involved the UK’s National Crime Agency (NCA). “Acourt thought he could evade capture but, as a result of an intelligence-led operation, his days on the run have ended,” said Ian Cruxton, the head of international operations for the NCA. “We were able to direct the Spanish authorities to his location in Barcelona. “Our ability to share information and work at speed with our international partners ensures there is no safe haven for fugitives. We will never stop pursuing these individuals.” The 41-year-old was arrested by armed officers as he left Barcelona’s Metropolitan Sagrada Familia gym on Friday afternoon, police said. Acourt, along with his brother Neil, was named to police among the prime suspects in the Stephen Lawrence murder inquiry. He has always maintained his innocence. The NCA said he was the 81st fugitive to be located out of 96 publicised through Operation Captura – targeting the most wanted in Spain. Acourt, who was apprehended on a European arrest warrant, will appear at a court in Madrid next week for an extradition hearing.
0||Joe Root and Alastair Cook out for ducks as Yorkshire  edge it against EssexThis was a day of Championship cricket the 2,600 crowd present at Chelmsford will not forget in a hurry: England captains current and former both out for ducks, 22 wickets falling and Yorkshire, having been bowled out for 50 in their first innings, ending it just on top. And that is not to forget that Jonny Bairstow was promoted to open in Yorkshire’s second innings and crunched a 44-ball fifty. Bairstow was spot on when he admitted: “It was difficult to sum up to be honest with you.” There was no doubt conditions played their part, with seam bowlers favoured. But the majority of wickets fell through batsman error, with a plethora of loose shots evident during the morning and afternoon sessions. Yorkshire opted to toss, won it and elected to bat before Sam Cook caused all sorts of problems with his nagging seamers. He claimed the first three wickets to fall as Yorkshire slipped to nine for three inside four overs, including Joe Root caught at first slip by Alastair Cook as he half-heartedly drove on the walk at his first ball of the summer. The 20-year-old also bowled Bairstow for seven with a beauty that nipped away and rocked back off-stump on the way to figures of five for 28. Peter Siddle chipped in with an excellent four for seven as Yorkshire posted their lowest total since 1973 when they were bowled out for 43 in the second innings of a defeat by Surrey at The Oval. By lunch Essex were 10 for two thanks to Jack Brooks, who had Alastair Cook caught behind for a six-ball duck as he fished at one he could have left alone before bowling Tom Westley. Wickets continued to tumble after lunch, with Brooks, Tim Bresnan and Ben Coad, who now has 20 wickets to his name in three matches, all claiming tidy three-wicket hauls. However, there were signs that batsmen could prosper as Dan Lawrence impressed with 48 off 77 balls. Tall and imposing, Lawrence played a couple of eye-catching drives through the covers and was particularly strong through mid-wicket and mid-on. Simon Harmer later boosted the Essex total with a lusty 36. After tea it was a completely different game. Batting looked a breeze as Yorkshire cruised to 161 for two, with Bairstow hitting 50 and the man he replaced at the top of the order, Harry Brook, reaching 57 not out – his maiden fifty. Bairstow set about the counterattack in typically combative style. His six over long-off off Sam Cook was the shot of the day before he was bowled by Siddle off the inside edge, prompting the Australian to give him an in-your-face send-off. Bairstow added: “There was plenty in the pitch and Essex bowled well. Every time there was something on offer we either missed it or nicked it. But for us to fight back, bowl them out cheaply and be 70 in front shows where we’re at. I think we’re in a good position. The way Harry and Puj [Che Pujara] played at the end stands us in good stead.” Trescothick injury spoils Somerset’s day A cruel injury to Marcus Trescothick spoiled Somerset’s run-happy day at Old Trafford in front of new England selector Ed Smith. Trescothick broke his right fifth metatarsal setting off for a run when on 95. He summoned a runner and hobbled to his 66th first-class hundred before being caught, cutting. It is too early to say if he will play again this season. There was also a wonderful first first-class century for 20-year-old George Bartlett. There were no wickets for the newly bleached Jimmy Anderson, lucky to avoid censure after throwing a ball at the stumps in frustration and hitting Bartlett on the legs. Lancashire left out Haseeb Hameed. At the Oval, Rory Burns made 137 not out and Ben Foakes 72 as Surrey closed on 278 for four against Worcestershire. Nottinghamshire were bowled out for 302, with a quick 73 from Samit Patel; Hampshire were 70 for three at stumps, James Vince fell cheaply; Stuart Broad took two for 19. Fourteen wickets fell at Hove where Middlesex were dismissed for 230, Oliver Robinson seven for 58. In reply Sussex were 60 for four; Tim Murtagh with two for 18. Glamorgan lost 10 for 37 to be bowled out for 94, Darren Stevens taking six for 26. Kent finished on 163 for nine Joe Denly 43, Timm van der Gugten with six for 40. Leicestershire composed 301 for four against Durham and at Edgbaston Warwickshire finished on 375 for six; Jonathan Trott 76, Matthew Lamb not out 79.
10||Why is the National Rifle Association so powerful?Why is the National Rifle Association so powerful? Here’s a clue: it’s not (just) about the money. The vast majority of Americans support gun control, and yet Congress has failed to toughen laws even in the wake of a series of mass shootings. With the NRA pouring money into political races at record levels it is an easy argument to make that the gun lobby has bought Washington – but that fails to paint a full picture. In 2017, the NRA spent at least $4.1m on lobbying – more than the $3.1m it spent in all of 2016. That’s real money, but for comparison, the dairy industry has spent $4.4m in the same period, according to the Center for Responsive Politics (CRP). The National Association of Realtors, one of the biggest spenders, has paid out $32.2m lobbying on housing issues. The US Chamber of Commerce, the largest spender of all, has spent $104m. The NRA’s influence does not stem solely from lobbying. Thanks to the supreme court’s Citizens United decision, the spigot is now wide open for “independent expenditures” allowing groups and individuals to back – or attack – candidates, as long as those campaigns are not made in cooperation with, or at the request of, a candidate. The NRA bet big on 2016’s presidential election, making independent expenditures worth $53.4m. And the cash seemed to have been well spent. The NRA poured $14.4m into supporting 44 candidates who won and $34.4m opposing 19 candidates who lost, according to CRP. Its only big loss was in Nevada, for the seat vacated by the Democratic minority leader, Harry Reid. Nor does the power of the guns manufacturers fully explain the NRA’s power. Guns are big(ish) business. Gun and ammunition manufacturers will have revenues of $13.3bn and profits of $1bn in 2017, according to IBISWorld. Gun and ammunition stores this year will have revenues of $85.bn and profits of $256m. But there are far bigger industries. The auto industry (which has spent $51.8m on lobbying so far in 2017), is on course for revenues of $105.3bn and profits of $3.1bn in 2017. The NRA’s influence, too, is out of proportion to its financial firepower. This is a world with far bigger spenders in Washington – the billionaire Koch brothers spent $889m on the election. And far bigger industries: Apple’s revenues were a record $52bn in the last three months alone and their cash, along with the other tech giants, makes the gun industry look like a rounding error. Dan Auble, a senior researcher at CRP, said NRA’s spending was at a record high but remained “paltry” in comparison to groups like the pharmaceutical industry. If the gun lobby is to be successful, it needs to spend money in Washington, and it does. But the amount alone does not explain the NRA’s success. “The NRA is not successful because of its money. To be sure, it is hard to be a force in American politics without money. The NRA has money that it uses to help its favored candidates get elected. But the real source of its power, I believe, comes from voters,” said Adam Winkler, professor of constitutional law at the UCLA School of Law and author of Gunfight: The Battle over the Right to Bear Arms in America. By choosing its battles wisely, the NRA has shown an ability to swing primary elections in favor of pro-gun candidates, Winkler said. “That’s the real source of their strength,” he said. That and its use of a relatively small number of highly motivated people to push an agenda that appears out of step with the general population, which, according to recent polling, is in favour of stricter gun laws. The 145-year-old organization claims 5 million active members, although that number is disputed. But whatever its actual size, that membership is a powerful tool, said Robert Spitzer, professor of crime, law and policy and gun control at the State University of New York at Cortland and the author of five books on guns. “They have a very powerful ability to mobilize a grassroots support and to engage in politics when most Americans can barely be bothered to vote,” he said. “I mean more than voting. I mean going to a meeting, writing a letter, contacting a friend,” he said. “And because so few Americans do those things, if you get a bunch of people in a locality who are all prepared to go out to a meeting they can have a big effect. “Elected officials feel the impact of constituents when they hear their voices,” said Spitzer. “Politics is often about the squeaky wheel – who makes the loudest noise, who gets the most attention.” There are, however, problems on the horizon for the NRA. For one, the gun control lobby is growing. Billionaire Michael Bloomberg’s gun control group Everytown for Gun Safety is threatening to spend more than $25m in 2018 races. Americans for Responsible Solutions, a gun control political action committee set up by Gabrielle Giffords, a former Democratic congresswoman whose career was ended when she was shot along with 18 others in an Arizona suburb, spent $13.4m in 2016. The issue for gun control advocates is that they have yet to develop as powerful a voice – or as deep contacts in Washington – as the gun lobby. “I think it’s fair to say that so far they have been thwarted at the federal level,” said Auble. “They are just not as well funded, not as established, and don’t have the history the NRA has.” Even if the gun control groups gave the same amount of money to the same candidates, said Winkler, those candidates would not vote in favor of gun control. “It’s not just money,” he said. “If Michael Bloomberg said he will give you $2 for every $1 the NRA gives you, it is not going to work.” The truth is that gun control is not an area where money is leading politics, he said. It’s an issue that some voters care a lot about and elected officials respond to those voters. “Especially the intense, mobilized, minority of voters that support most vigorously the right to bear arms.” But putting the money and its current influence aside, the NRA faces existential issues in the years ahead as its opposition grows. The election of Donald Trump was a major victory for the NRA. On the eve of his 100th day in office, Trump addressed the NRA’s annual conference, the first sitting president to do so since Ronald Reagan in 1983. “You came through for me, and I am going to come through for you,” Trump told the cheering crowd. “I am here to deliver you good news: the eight-year assault on your second amendment freedoms has come to a crashing end.” That cheering crowd – largely white, male and older – was a snapshot of the people who swung Trump’s victory. It’s also a picture of a demographic in decline. By mid-century the US is expected to become a majority minority nation. The NRA’s core constituency is basically older white males. Younger people are not taking up gun ownership at the same rate as older people did, said Spitzer, and polls of minorities show they feel more strongly about gun control. Attempts by the NRA to broaden its appeal do not seem to have paid off. “They are facing an existential demographic problem,” said Spitzer. Even a Trump presidency may not be good for the NRA. Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton presented the NRA with obvious foes. Gun sales are falling after the glory years of the Obama administration, when each mass shooting led to a spike in sales as Democrats called for gun control and gun owners ran to the shops. With their people in office, the industry – and the NRA – lack a demon to drive sales and membership. The NRA has shifted gears post-Obama, taking a leaf out of Trump’s all-caps textbook and attacking the media for demonizing gun owners and the president. Such a move is unlikely to win over minority support. “If the NRA really wants to reach a new generation, maybe they need to reach out to Black Lives Matter. Who are the people who are being abused by government agents the most? You would think that Black Lives Matter would have some affinity with that idea that you need guns to protect yourself against a hostile government that can’t protect you,” said Spitzer. But even the NRA knows that the best thing that the gun control movement could see right now would be a lot of African Americans or Muslims carrying guns around America. The NRA has changed many times in its history, for much of the 20th century it supported gun control. For all its current power there is nothing to suggest the organization is invulnerable to change. Indeed, in this month’s special elections NRA favorites fell to candidates who support more gun control. “The NRA face really significant challenges. How they manage them remains to be seen,” said Spitzer. This article was amended on 28 November 2017 to clarify a description of the Citizens United supreme court ruling.
1||Post-Infinity War: what's next for the Avengers?In Avengers: Infinity War, the heroes actually lose. The Avengers fail to stop Thanos from obtaining all six infinity stones, and with the snap of his finger Thanos instantly turns half of the universe’s population to dust. Shockingly, it’s the more recently introduced Avengers who are among his many casualties: Spider-Man, Black Panther, Doctor Strange, Winter Soldier, Falcon, Scarlet Witch, and most of the Guardians of the Galaxy fade into the wind. The original five, meanwhile –Captain America, Iron Man, Hulk, Thor and Black Widow – are left in stunned silence, gaping in loss and disbelief. And then the credits roll. As the culmination of a decade of superhero movie-making – 17 films grossing more than $13bn globally – Infinity War was always expected to be grand. The massive success of the Marvel Cinematic Universe has not only changed the way Hollywood approaches franchises; it has cemented superhero films as an indelible part of mainstream culture. While fans can rejoice that there are at least 20 more films planned, the MCU’s sprawling success is also why we know, as shocking as Infinity War’s end is, that the deaths are just not going to stick. Both Spider-Man and Guardians of the Galaxy have confirmed films after Avengers 4, and undoubtedly Marvel is planning a sequel to Black Panther, its highest-grossing solo film to date. So what does that mean for Avengers 4? Marvel Studios is notorious for keeping all aspects of production under wraps, with actors being given fake scripts and trailers cut to be misleading. We can glean some hints from the comics, though, as well as in-film references and interviews. Infinity War is a mixture of two comic book storylines: Jim Starlin’s 1991 Infinity Gauntlet and Jonathan Hickman’s 2013 Infinity. Both can provide hints for Avengers 4. In Infinity Gauntlet, the souls destroyed by the soul stone are not gone but transported to Soul World, a universe that exists inside the stone. A character named Adam Warlock is able to communicate with the stones from Soul World; that, combined with Thanos having a crisis of confidence, allows his daughter Nebula to defeat him. If Avengers 4 pays homage to this, it may mean that Gamora, who Thanos sacrificed in Infinity War to summon the Soul Stone, is not dead after all. We know Thanos is already mourning her death, and that wavering may give Gamora and Nebula the opportunity to finally conquer their father. Even Zoe Saldana herself hinted as much, having let slip in an E! Live interview that she’s been on set for Avengers 4. Similarly, in Infinity we see an epic team-up battle against Thanos that features Thor, Captain America and Captain Marvel, whom Nick Fury pages in the post-credits of Infinity War. The Marvel Studios head, Kevin Feige, says that Captain Marvel is “by far the strongest character we’ve ever had”, so we’ll probably see that epic fight on screen. We can also expect the fallout from that battle: after defeating Thanos, the Avengers are cemented not only as Earth’s mightiest heroes, but as the universe’s protectors – an act that could easily spin out another decade of films. But how will Avengers 4 actually reverse the deaths? In an interview with Buzzfeed, the Infinity War screenwriters Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely are adamant that the characters genuinely did die: “[Avengers 4] doesn’t do what you think it does … [the deaths are] real. I just want to tell you it’s real.” Assuming this is not a misdirect, this puts to rest theories that Thanos didn’t just send everyone to a parallel dimension or trap them in Soul World. The answer to fixing this, then, has to be time travel. Doctor Strange alludes repeatedly to this. In one scene, Iron Man is reprimanded for leaning on the Cauldron of the Cosmos, an item in the comics used to peer back in time. Strange also emphasizes that keeping the time stone safe is his only priority; while he’s eventually forced to give it up, at one point he occupies Thanos with a decoy. Where was the real stone before it materialized in his hand? Was it sent back (or forward) in time? With Strange divining only one possible future, out of 14 million, in which the Avengers succeed, the answer is likely to be complicated. Feeding into this are the two films debuting before Avengers 4, Ant-Man and the Wasp and Captain Marvel. In speaking with Inverse, the Marvel consultant and physicist Spiros Michalakis confirmed that both movies will feature the quantum realm, a pocket universe where linear time and space don’t exist – a key detail if we’re talking time travel. Leaked Avengers 4 set photos seem to confirm the quantum realm will enable time hops, as we can see Ant-Man talking to Captain America in his original star-spangled outfit, and Tony wearing an old S.H.I.E.L.D. patch. As for how the Avengers will know when to travel to, the Russos have hinted that Stark’s BARF technology from Civil War will play a role. The technology projects memories, which means the Avengers could comb through key events – their battle of New York, for example – to figure out their destination. And then what of the original Avengers, the ones left standing? We can expect to see a closing out of several arcs as the actors’ contracts end. In a Vanity Fair cover story, Feige says that Avengers 4 will “bring things you’ve never seen in superhero films: a finale”. That means saying goodbye to characters like Captain America and Iron Man, while setting up the future of the MCU. Sebastian Stan has claimed he’s signed on for nine films, for example, meaning he may take up the Captain America mantle as in the comics. Chris Hemsworth’s contract is also ending, but he has said he’s open to a fourth Thor standalone; we also know a Black Widow film is in the works, and Mark Ruffalo has one more film left. With hope, we’ll see hints at what phase four could be: perhaps Carol Danvers greets a young girl named Kamala Khan, or Tony Stark mentions a Riri Williams. Feige himself has said these characters are like James Bond; they won’t be recast but rather passed down. So while it will be painful to say goodbye to characters we’ve sat with for a decade now, their characters will never really be gone. Their ideas remain.
17||Breast cancer screening hotline staffed by people with only an hour's trainingDistraught women contacting the government’s breast cancer screening hotline are being connected with call-handlers who have had only one hour’s training and are relying on a cheat sheet of symptoms, the Guardian has learned. The hotline opened on Wednesday after health secretary Jeremy Hunt said a computer error meant 450,000 women between the ages of 68 and 71 did not receive letters inviting them for a final breast cancer screening. He said up to 270 lives may have been cut short as a result. It is being run by Serco, a multinational outsourcing company that runs government services including prisons. The call centres are based in Glasgow, Liverpool and Newcastle. Workers said they are “disgusted” at the way it is being operated and described scenes of chaos in recent days, as call volumes rose from 5,000 on Wednesday to 10,000 on Friday. Staff said the rush to set up the hotline led them to fear mistakes could be made in the handling of women’s cases as they were not medical professionals and had received so little training. Labour said the problems with the helpline were “hugely serious”. It said there had been an assumption that there was an expectation that trained clinicians would be available to worried callers. A booklet provided to the call centre workers included a page that lists symptoms of breast cancer, which staff are supposed to go through if people calling the helpline ask. A staff member who contacted the Guardian said the training sheet was “all over the place and hard to understand ... It looked like it had been typed up and sent out as soon as possible”. She added that she feared a lack of knowledge from those fielding calls was going to “cause more mistakes.” One staff member said: “I felt ashamed knowing what had happened to these women, taking these calls when I am not medically trained, have no counselling background and am in no position to help them.” She added: “Other people I work with feel the same. A girl who was working yesterday said taking calls was horrendous as people were getting really upset ... People also cannot deal with the volume of calls coming through. We are not trained to be dealing with those type of things.” Serco employees were told about the news at noon on the day Hunt revealed the issue in the Commons, and training in how to handle calls was delivered two hours later. The helpline was up and running at 4pm, said call centre workers speaking on condition of anonymity. They have faced an avalanche of calls, with the number of people calling in distress doubling from 5,000 on Thursday lunchtime to 10,000 on Friday, according to figures released by Public Health England. The rushed response to setting up the helpline comes despite the fact that the government had known about the screening error since January, discovering the missed invites after an upgrade to the IT system provided access to improved data sets. Usually staff members are given two weeks training to handle calls, one said. They also reported having to drop coverage on other helplines, including booking appointments for universal credit, the government’s benefits system that has already been widely criticised because of the minimum 42-day wait for applications to be processed. Jonathan Ashworth MP, the shadow health secretary, said: “It seems the outsourcing firm Serco is running the hotline with staff who have no medical background or training in counselling, responding to women on these calls ... There are of course huge questions that remain unanswered about this tragic scandal but the government’s priority must also be to ensure adequate resources are in place to give women the help they need.” The Guardian saw sheets from what one Serco worker said was a 23-page pack given to call-centre handlers advising them on how to help those worried women who call up. There was a further four pages on possible scenarios and seven pages of frequently answered questions. One worker said: “I don’t think the people whose family members have died would like to know the people they’ve been directed to to help them aren’t medical professionals but have to give medical advice and it’s all from one information sheet.” She added: “We found out at noon and were delivered training at 2.30pm. We were then taking taking calls live at 4pm ... Normally we get two weeks training and this was one hour and a half ... it is ridiculous, there’s no way we could take in all that information in that amount of time.” Serco provides a broad range of services for governments and corporations worldwide. It runs a number of government services including health, transport, justice, immigration and defence. In the past it has come under fire for overcharging on government contracts to tag offenders, as well as for its running of a number of private prisons. Public Health England confirmed that it had contracted out the helpline to Serco. A PHE spokesperson said: “We are committed to ensuring that affected women and their families receive all the support they need ... We are aware that the helpline is busy, particularly at peak times. We have built additional resilience into the system to ensure that as many people are able to receive support as possible.” A spokesperson for Serco said: “Our operatives are all trained and experienced in providing contact services on behalf of public service customers. They are using information and advice provided by Public Health England and are required to collect details of women who believe they have missed screening, so they can be contacted by health professionals, and to set out the options available to them.”
0||Patriots coach Belichick and Incredible Hulk star Ferrigno join Trump sports councilDuring Donald Trump’s presidential campaign, he promised the American public “we’re going to win so much, you’re going to be so sick and tired of winning.” So it’s little surprise Trump has decided to appoint Bill Belichick, a man who has made America sick and tired of watching the New England Patriots win the Super Bowl, to the President’s Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition. Joining Belichick are an eclectic band of names, including bodybuilder and former Incredible Hulk actor Lou Ferrigno, Olympic beach volleyball champion Misty May-Treanor, New York Yankees legend Mariano Rivera and college football hall of famer Herschel Walker, who played for Trump’s New Jersey Generals in the 1980s. Also on the list is Mehmet Oz, better known as TV’s Dr Oz, who has been widely criticised for promoting pseudoscience. Belichick, who has transformed the Patriots into a ruthless winning machine since taking over as head coach in 2000, is an old friend of Trump. In the run-up to the 2016 presidential election, Trump read out a letter he said Belichick had written in support of his campaign, praising Trump as “the ultimate competitor and fighter”. Belichick later said the note was not meant as a political statement. The Patriots’ quarterback, Tom Brady, perhaps the most famous athlete in America, displayed a Make America Great Again cap in his locker during the early days of Trump’s campaign. It is unlikely Belichick will emulate the president’s love of Twitter in his new role. In 2015, the famously taciturn Belichick made his contempt for social media known. “Just go talk to the geniuses online. MyFace, YourFace, InstantFace … just go talk to whoever you want that does that stuff. I don’t know,” he said. It is believed the council will put more emphasis on children’s participation in sport than under the Obama administration when the body was particularly focused on nutrition. Trump’s decision to include high-profile athletes is in line with the Obama administration, when figures such as New Orleans Saints quarterback Drew Brees and tennis champion and civil rights activist Billie Jean King served on the council.
3||Why is Trump surrounded by cocky, unqualified and kooky men?They say you can tell a lot about a person by the company they keep. The presidency is no different: when it comes to a commander-in-chief, you can tell a lot from the aides they keep close. Barack Obama’s closest staffers were often intensely competitive, earnest, studious types who struggled to understand why the world didn’t admire their idealism and talent as much as they did. George W Bush, at least in his first term, surrounded himself with trigger-happy street fighters who confused patriotism with their own paranoia and prejudice. In the case of Donald Trump, the company he keeps is surprisingly consistent: a singular type with a shared set of character traits. They are, to a man, cocky, unqualified and kooky. You might call this the CUK theory of the Trump presidency, in honor of one of their archetypes: Steve Bannon. All the president’s men – at least, the CUKs – are a constant presence, in spite of the huge turnover among them. There was Bannon, now there’s Bolton. There was Scaramucci, now there’s Giuliani. It matters not. Trump cycles through his CUKs happily and frequently because he needs to keep one or more close through all his volatility. Let’s start with Bannon: the man who believed he was reshaping global politics. Never mind all that help from Russia and Facebook, Bannon was riding the crest of a wave of his own making. Nobody had discovered white male resentment before: not Richard Nixon, not Pat Buchanan, not even Bill Clinton. Bannon thinks he’s so good at this stuff that he was considering running for president himself in 2020. He also told Vanity Fair that getting fired from the White House was an upgrade: inside the West Wing he had influence, but outside he had real power. Cocky? Check. How unqualified was Bannon at his purported job of chief political strategist? Exhibit A is Roy Moore in Alabama, a candidate accused of child abuse, whose doomed campaign was Bannon’s great last stand. If you can’t see the limits of white male resentment in the state that built its politics on those foundations, then you have forever lost your credentials as a political strategist. Status: unqualified. Kookiness was Bannon’s calling card, his cri de coeur. You could plunge into the conspiracy-filled world of his media creation, Breitbart, to explore all the crazy theories he thrived on. Or you could read about the guy who ate green ketamine before he showed up to work, because he makes more sense. So many pundits took Bannon’s kooky ideas as some kind of mark of genius, because of 70,000 votes in three swing states and the quirks of the electoral college. But to recap, Bannon was inspired by a French occultist and Italian racialist to assert that western civilization was locked in “a new dark age” as part of an existential battle with Islam. Which just goes to show that reading books doesn’t necessarily make you less kooky. Where does John Bolton, the latest in a long line of Trump’s national security advisers, sit on the CUK scale? If Bannon is a perfect 10, Bolton is a nine. People who worked with him in the Bush administration say he’s arrogant, when they’re trying to be diplomatic – a quality that Bolton lacks entirely. Bolton even maintains his arrogance about his biggest, most obvious disaster: his cheerleading for the invasion of Iraq. When Tucker Carlson, of Fox News fame, asked him if the war in Iraq had empowered his great enemies in Iran, Bolton said: “No, because I think your analysis is simple-minded, frankly.” Calling the supremely cocky Tucker Carlson “simple-minded” is a power play in the league of cocky politics. This takes us directly to his obvious lack of qualifications to manage national security for the world’s greatest military force. In addition to his colossal errors of judgment about Iraq, he is a hothead and a disastrously bad manager. He isn’t even on the same page as his boss about talking to North Korea, having spent a career trashing them as serial liars and conmen. Which brings us to his kookiness. This is a national security adviser who recently advocated for a pre-emptive strike against North Korea. This is a former UN ambassador who believed the top 10 floors of the UN could be demolished with no impact on the organization. He only drops a point on the CUK scale because of the lack of occultist influence. Anthony “the Mooch” Scaramucci is an epic example of the president’s favorite man. Cocky doesn’t come close to the extravagant strutting and preening of a man who claimed everyone else was obsessed with their own penis. The Mooch was so unqualified for the job of White House communications director that he lasted 10 or perhaps 11 days in office. That’s in a West Wing where the only qualification for a job is a pulse and never-ending praise for the boss. Which brings us to his kookiness. For the Mooch, Trump is “perhaps the least racist” person on the planet, even though he sympathizes with neo-Nazis. Trump is also “neurologically sound” even though, well, everything he has tweeted in the last 16 months. Overall on the CUK scale, the Mooch’s supreme cockiness balances out the relative lack of kookiness, making him a solid eight. So to our latest member of the gang: Rudy Giuliani. According to the otherwise friendly New York Post, it was Rudy’s arrogance that killed his 2008 presidential campaign. For some reason, early state voters found it a turnoff. This is a man who endorsed Trump at the Republican convention by saying the next president would carry the Giuliani torch: “What I did for New York City, Donald Trump will do for America.” If anyone had any doubts about Rudy’s qualifications to be the latest in a long line of Trump’s lawyers, this week was truly special. In a couple of Fox News interviews, Giuliani contradicted the previous official story about Trump’s lawyer paying hush money to the actress known as Stormy Daniels. Along the way, he exposed his new client to additional legal risk and managed to refocus the world’s attention on the president and a porn star on the National Day of Prayer. Pure genius. Among the many kooky theories Rudy has peddled was his repeated stirring of the pot about Hillary Clinton’s health, his obvious superiority to Beyoncé, and his recent description of FBI agents as “stormtroopers”. For all this and so much more, Rudy scores another perfect 10 as a CUK. Curious minds might wonder why this president chooses to surround himself with so many men who are cocky, unqualified and kooky. For someone so modest, so well-versed in world affairs, and so cogent, it seems so obviously out of character.
0||County cricket: Yorkshire rally after first innings of 50 against Essex – as it happenedWhat a day - ridiculous goings-on at Chelmsford; a cruel injury to an old warhorse, I won’t say on his swansong, and youthful blooming at Old Trafford; wickets galore at Hove and Sophia Gardens. Young runs at The Oval – Rory Burns and Ben Foakes give Ed Smith something to mull over tonight – and runs too for the carthorses put out to grass by England: Trott, Bell and Patel. Have a lovely Friday everyone. Division One Surrey 278-4 v Worcestershire Notts 302, Hampshire 70-3; Hampshire trail by 232 Lancashire v Somerset 321-5 Essex 142, Yorkshire 50, 161-2; Yorkshire lead by 69 Division Two Sussex 60-4, Middlesex 230; Sussex trail by 170 Glamorgan 94, Kent 163-9; Kent lead by 69 Durham v Leicestershire 301-4 News from OT: Marcus Trescothick has a broken right fifth metatarsal and is out for the foreseeable future, too early to say if he will play again this season. Close of play round up to follow Yorkshire resistance starts to crumble: 97 for 2, a second for Siddle - Lyth, whose name is definitely missing a vowel somewhere, 27. Hampshire 23 for 3, Vince lbw Fletcher 5. They’ve got to pick the Test team after the next round. Ed Smith has lots of, how do you say, opportunity for action? Elsewhere: Burns 137 not out, Trott 70 not out and Abell 44 not out here in the sunshine. Jonny Bairstow has gone, bowled by Peter Siddle off an inside-edge for 50. That left Yorkshire at 77/1, with the score now moving to 92/1. Scores level. The Bairstow dismissal culminated into the Australian quick giving Bairstow a send-off. We still have 15 and a half overs to bowl tonight, so things could change very quickly. At the moment, it feels like Yorkshire have the advantage. A standing ovation for Bartlett, pushing forward at Mennie and wonderfully caught by Livingstone leaping like a ... jackknife at second slip. What a super innings – 110 off 210 balls. Patient, watchful but full of plucked-off-the-tree shots. Somerset 294 for 4. And fifty for Barstow! 43 balls, 6 fours, 1 six. Yorkshire 77 for 0. Tim Murtagh is on the prowl at Hove, two for 5 as Sussex stutter to 7 for 2 (continued below) Hampshire have lost Jimmy Adams for a duck, 9/1, and Yorkshire have already overtaken their first-innings total at Chelmsford but this time without losing a wicket. Jonny Barstow surely dreaming of a century before stumps, 39 (5x4, 1x6). Kent wobbling at 111 for 5, four wickets for van der Gusten including Denly for 43. Matthew Lamb has joined Trott with a fifty for Warwickshire: 322 for 5. Yorkshire have topped their first-innings total of 50 in a flash. They have moved to 59/0 in the 12th over, with Jonny Bairstow unbeaten on 39 off 35 balls. It’s funny how this game works isn’t it. For the first two sessions, not an over went by where a batsman looked secure at the crease. Now, Essex don’t look like taking a wicket. The White Rose county are just 33 behind, and I suspect Ryan ten Doeschate and Anthony McGrath will be getting a bit twitchy given what’s to come in the away dressing room. And with an edge past slip that’s a glorious HUNDRED for Bartlett off 189 balls, 12 x4, 1 x 6. His debut first-class century, in the same innings as Marcus Trescothick made his 65th, showing great patience, before England’s new selector, in glorious sunshine. Give the man a cigar. His highest first-class score before this was 39 last week against Yorkshire. Meanwhile at Chelmsford, Yorkshire are 34 without loss with Jonny Barstow leaping up the order to open with Lyth and thrashing about for 26 including a 6. At the County Ground against the tourists, Northants wicketkeeper Adam Rossington is stumped for 90, six wickets for Shadab: Northants 249 for 9. Yorkshire have opened the innings with Adam Lyth and Jonny Bairstow, with the latter making his intentions very clear. In the over just bowled, the sixth, he cracked Sam Cook for six and four over mid-off’s head to help Yorkshire to 27-0. He’s just done exactly the same to Jamie Porter as I type - 33-0 in the seventh. In a flash, the Essex lead is 59. And Notts are all out: 302 in just over 69 overs, Gurney stranded on 16; Edwards 4-94. Middlesex all out too, for 230, Robinson 7-58! Yorkshire hit the heady heights of 6 for 0. And a half-century for Trott! Well played that man. A paean here from Jonathan Liew And a century for Rory Burns! 225 balls, 9 x fours: a first Championship hundred of the season for him. An interesting stat here too And there will be no warning for Anderson, as Bartlett was out of his crease when the ball hit him... Essex have been bowled out for 142, a first-innings lead of 92, on the stroke of tea. We still have 31 overs to be bowled in the day, so maybe that one-day finish is not out of the question. Will firm up the stat later, but talk in the press box was going back to the 1950s for the last time that happened in the Championship. And Essex are all out for 142, a lead of 92. Gird yourselves Yorkies. And Trotty sups tea on 42, on this grand day for England oldies. DIVISION ONE The Oval: Surrey 176 for 3 (Burns 84 not out, Foakes 41 not out; Leach 2-34) Trent Bridge: Nottinghamshire 281 for 9 (Patel 73, Ball 1 not out, Gurney 5 not out; Edwards 4-82) Old Trafford: Somerset 228 for 3 (Trescothick 100, Bartlett 77 not out, Abell 5 not out) Chelmsford: Essex 128-9 (Lawrence 48, Harmer 23 not out, S Cook 3 not out); Yorkshire 50 all out (Balance 22; S Cook 5-28) Bresnan DIVISION TWO Hove: Middlesex 205 for 8 (Holden 69 not out, Murtagh 19 not out; Robinson 6-57) Sophia Gardens: Kent 40-3 (Denly 12 not out, Crawley 3 not out; van der Gugten 2-10) Glamorgan 94 all out (Murphy 39 not out; Stevens 6-26) Riverside: Leicester 203 for 3 (Horton 75, Carberry 73, Cosgrove 11 not out) Edgbaston: Warwickshire 144 for 2; Derby 318 all out TOUR MATCH Northants v Pakistan: Northants 205 for 7 (Rossington 59 not out, Vasconcelos 18 not out; Shadab 4-72) We still have seven overs remaining in the afternoon and 39 in the day, with Essex just having reached triple figures - a feat greeted by hearty applause from the home faithful. They have moved to 109/7. Tim Bresnan has taken the last three wickets to fall to keep Yorkshire’s hopes of a Houdini act alive. Simon Harmer and Peter Siddle are at the crease. Siddle has just whacked Bresnan for six over long-on. To add to the drama, there’s the odd topless spectator knocking around. English summers, eh! Another wicket at Old Trafford: Somerset 215 for 3 – Hildreth c Clark at mid-off b Mennie for 5. Somewhat earlier Anderson hit the grumpometre, lost his cool and threw a ball at the striker’s end and hit Bartlett on the back of the legs. The men in white coats conferred and it looks like a warning for Anderson. All in front of new selector Ed Smith who arrived to see the end of Trescothick and a lovely debut fifty from Bartlett, his first first-class 50 in his sixth match. Elsewhere, Rory Burns has 83 and Ben Foakes 35 for Surrey, 173 for 3; Notts 253 for 6, Wessels nearing 50; Essex 93 for 7, Bresnan 3 for 12; Middlesex 189 for 8 with a sixth wicket for Robinson and 62 not out for Max Holden and, good heavens, Glamorgan, who somehow slipped totally off my radar, were bowled out for 94. Kent already 18 for 1 in reply. Leicester 176 for 2, Northants 199 for 7 against Pakistan and Trotty 24 not out in Warwickshire’s 236 for five. Pantomime proceedings at Old Trafford … Trescothick hoicks Parkinson for four, no foot movement at all, then a couple more ... 99! That’s it … a HUNDRED … he raises his bat, pure arm movement, legs perfectly still. Then he hobbles about to accept a handshake or two. This is a run-out waiting to happen. It is as if he is wearing iron boots. Ah, there we are, he edges behind, tries to cut Livingstone’s first ball and is CAUGHT, limps off the field for 100: c Vilas b Livingstone. A second first-class century at Old Trafford. Somerset 200 for 2. And a little bit of Friday afternoon happiness. It gives you an idea of how crazy this game has been that there has been the odd mention in the press box, more in jest I grant you, of a one-day finish. However, that is very much out of the window now with Essex at 68/4 and leading by 18. At 12/3 it wasn’t the daftest suggestion. Ravi Bopara was the last wicket to go, caught at first slip off Steve Patterson. Dan Lawrence is unbeaten on 45 as we approach the midway point of the afternoon. And, just five away from his century, Trescothick pushes off for a single and collapses on the pitch. The physic comes out, everyone faffs about then Trescothick limps around using his bat as a walking stick. It barely merits description as a hobble - but he seems determined to stay out there. Renshaw emerges as his runner. This could be interesting. ... as with a nudge off his hip Trescothick moves on to 95. Here’s a vintage shot May the fourth be with the Essex groundsman- thank you Paul Frame News of England ancients: At Edgbaston Bell out for 44, Trott in, Warwickshire 172 for 3. Patel out for 73, a third wicket for Fidel Edwards at Trent Bridge. Essex are just four runs behind Yorkshire for the loss of three wickets and Middlesex are recovering with an unbeaten 44-run partnership between Holden and Simpson. Here Trescothick is only 14 away from his hundred, he and Bartlett’s century partnership came in 168 balls. And from Palf, for you Galactus: More post-prandial mishaps: Surrey have lost a couple: Borthwick c Cox b Leach for 10, and Ryan Patel for 10: 99 for 3. And a clatter at Sophia Gardens as Glamorgan lose 3 for 10, a couple of wickets for Darren Stevens. Fifties for Michael Carberry and Paul Horton at The Riverside in an unbeaten opening stand of 114. And 37 not out for Bell at Edgbaston. And here Trescothick moves steadfastly onwards against tight Lancashire bowling. An off-drive off Mennie after lunch had the press-box tummy-up and purring in appreciation. And he’s still pretty nimble between the wickets. Somerset 143 for 1. Time to praise a batsman. But, knowing my luck, I won’t get to the end of this post before he is out. Dan Lawrence has played very nicely for 31 to just take the sting out of things for Essex. One cover drive off Jack Brooks was particularly pleasing on the eye. Where all the attention is on England’s present in this game, it could be that we are looking at their future in this instance. Essex are 38/3 and trail by just 12. New session, same story. Yorkshire have a wicket, their third of the innings, as Ben Coad bowls Nick Browne for seven to leave Essex at 12/3. “50 looks a bloody long way off here” says one spectator in front of me with an accent that’s more Batley than Brentwood. Sandwiches sitting solidly - wicket already .... Glamorgan 57 for 1: Selman lbw Stevens 33. Oh and at Chelmsford, Essex now 12 for 3, Browne b Coad 7. And a very difficult dropped catch first ball after lunch at Old Trafford. Trescothick on 54 cut to backward point where Croft made a valiant leap. And Vilas has taken the gloves here, Davies still on the field but not behind the stumps. Division One The Oval: Surrey 87 for 1 Trent Bridge: Nottinghamshire 137 for 4 Old Trafford: Lancashire 113 for 1 Chelmsford: Yorkshire 50 all out; Essex 10-2 Division Two Hove: Middlesex 81-5 Sophia Gardens: Glamorgan 57 for 0 Riverside: Leicester 80 for 0 Edgbaston: Warwickshire 144 for 2; Derby 318 all out Tour match Northants v Pakistan: Northants 88 for 2 Very, very strange events at Chelmsford headline another eventful morning’s play. Yorkshire won the toss, batted, and were bowled out before lunch; Essex are currently not looking much better at 10 for 2. Ducks already for Cook, Westley, Lyth and Root. Here at Old Trafford Somerset are trundling along against the boldly haired Anderson and the impressive Lancashire attack. Fifty for Trescothick – treasure him while he lasts. Solid starts too for Surrey, though a run-out, alas, for Stoneman, and another run-out at Trent Bridge – this time Ross Taylor on 47 - as Notts race away to 137 for four. A rapid 52 not out for Samit Patel. Wickets at Hove, where Middlesex are 81 for 5, with Oliver Robinson taking all wickets to fall, 5-33. A steady morning for Glamorgan, Leicester and Warwickshire too. Lunchtime scores to follow shortly. So, Joe Root, Jonny Bairstow and Alastair Cook have fallen for seven runs between them this morning. Yorkshire have the breakthrough as they defend 50. Cook, another poor shot to add to the morning collection, is caught behind off Jack Brooks for nought. And, as I type, Tom Westley plays an awfully expansive drive and loses his middle stump to Brooks. Essex are 2-2. A 68-ball 50 for Trescothick at Old Trafford. Seven fours and a real treat for the not-bad crowd who’ve turned up. The shots are still there, plus the old authority, and a quick study through the binoculars is very revealing. He’s a reliably well-upholstered presence, but also an inveterate fiddler – gloves on, gloves off, tuck shirt into trousers, re-tuck shirt into trousers in, flick invisible pieces off grit off the pitch, pat grass, remove helmet. And repeat. Trescothick’s only century at Old Trafford came in May 2001 v Pakistan, just saying, though he has a remarkably consistent first-class record here: 15 matches, 9 fifties, 1 hundred, average 48.1 Yorkshire have been bowled out for 50 inside 19 overs, with Peter Siddle finishing with 4-7 and Sam Cook 5-28. In terms of low totals, it is Yorkshire’s lowest since posting 43 against Surrey at the Oval in 1973. Geoff Boycott played in that match. This is incredible. Yorkshire are 49/9 having just lost Steve Patterson and Jack Brooks to Peter Siddle in the 17th over, caught behind and caught at third slip respectively. Gary Ballance has to have a dart now with only Ben Coad left for company. He has 21. And a wicket at The Oval, Stoneman run-out for 28, which you can watch here, thanks to the Surrey cricket feed that now features a GIANT picture of Kohli dominating Big Ben and the London Eye. Surrey 51/1. Notts whizzing along to 100 off 111 balls. It has certainly done a bit this morning, the ball which got Jonny Bairstow indicated that - nipped away and took off-stump from Sam Cook. But there have been a number of loose shots too. Harry Brook could have left his alone, Adam Lyth and Joe Root were not committed to their strokes when driving and Che Pujara lbw playing across the line. Yorkshire’s rebuild job has been left to Gary Ballance and Jack Leaning, who have 16 and seven respectively. They have taken the score to 41-5 in the 15th. Crikey, that’s twice it’s happened to me this morning. Wickets as I type. Leaning is trapped lbw by Peter Siddle, also playing loosely. Make that 41/6. And a wicket falls at Old Trafford, Somerset 65 for 1. Renshaw, who had been engaged in an intriguing battle with Tom Bailey, repeatedly beaten before driving him with ferocity down the ground for four past a ducking Trescothick, suddenly has a moment of madness. He flicks uppishly off his legs and is caught by Jordan Clark for 21. Samit Patel has just hit 21 off a Fidel Edwards over at Trent Bridge, where Notts are 81 for 3. A busy first half hour at Old Trafford where Somerset have rattled along to 48 without loss. Marcus Trescothick navigated through his notoriously tricky first few overs by throwing the bat about, unbothered by the bleach beacon running in towards him. Tom Bailey conceded one fewer run off his first over than in his entire 19 against Surrey in the second innings here last week. And the sun has just come out. Elsewhere, Middlesex are two down, Gubbins out for 8; Notts 27-3, Fidel Edwards two for 2. And 22 for 5 now at Chelmsford. The three ducks on the Yorkshire scorecard might be some light-relief for David Hopps, part of the old-time Guardian Hopps-Selve double-act who was hoping to win a seat last night in Elmet and Rothwell. Footnote: Not wanting to stray too much into Andrew Sparrow’s live politics blog territory, but as a matter of record Hopps failed to get elected. He garnered 1,189 votes in the Wetherby seat he was contesting, but was well behind the three Tories (one of whom was a Mr Alan Lamb) who took the trio of seats available for the Conservatve party (you can find the full results here) - Ed. Would you believe it! Joe Root is out for a golden duck, caught at first slip by Alastair Cook off Sam Cook. There’s a quip in there somewhere. Yorkshire are 9/3 in the fourth over and Cook was on a hat-trick having had Adam Lyth caught behind with the first ball of the over. He had earlier enticed Harry Brook into poking a slip catch to Simon Harmer at second slip, meaning three wickets in five balls split between overs. Root was driving on the move to the young Essex seamer before trudging back to the pavilion. Che Pujara and Gary Ballance are at the crease now. Hang on, Pujara’s gone too. Lbw to Porter for 9. Yorkshire are 11/4. Oh no! Arrived at Old Trafford to find that Haseeb Hameed has been dropped. And also Jimmy Anderson has had an interesting bleach job … Also, it is cloudy, Somerset are batting and Trescothick is 15 not out. Yorkshire have opted for a toss, won it and elected to bat here at Chelmsford, meaning time at the crease today for Joe Root and Jonny Bairstow. The visitors have opted to play seven batsmen and no spinner, with Steve Patterson returning from a broken finger to play for the first time this summer. Left-arm twirler Karl Carver drops out of the team after one match in which he did not bowl a ball against Somerset at Taunton at the weekend. It is a glorious day - warm and sunny. I’ve even spotted some sun cream going on to a few faces in front of the press box. The quirk of the county fixture list means this is the return clash between these two sides, although not a ball was bowled at Headingley last month due to the wet outfield. In fact, it is actually the third time these two have met in the last five Championship games given they both ended the season here last September. That, a comprehensive three-day victory for Essex, is still fresh in the memory for both sides. Ravi Bopara plays his 200th first-class match. We’ve somehow already hobbled along to the fourth round of Championship matches, with lots of alluring fixtures to look forward to. The weather seems kinder, so fingers crossed for fewer brolly-watch updates. The final face cards in the England pack are being played today: Joe Root, Jonny Bairstow and Jimmy Anderson return for Yorkshire and Lancashire. In the last few days we’ve also learnt that dear old Jonathan Trott will retire at the end of this season and, contrary to what you may have read on the County Blog last week, Virat Kohli will play for Surrey – for three Championship matches and at least three One-Day Cup games in June. One Championship game is already under way, Warwickshire v Derbyshire at Edgbaston. Derby named Mark Footitt, on loan from Nottinghamshire, and England Under-19 off-spinner Hamidullah Qadri in their XI. There was a hundred for Wayne Madsen in Derby’s 318 all out; with four wickets for both Henry Brookes and Jeetan Patel. Warwickshire are 32 for 1 in reply. Games starting today … Division One Essex v Yorkshire: A big-name game: Cook, fresh from his 84, Tom Westley and COTY Jamie Porter plus the returning Root and Bairstow. Yorkshire’s batsmen had a shocker at Taunton last week; Essex have battled rain in two games, though they did beat Lancashire. Lancashire v Somerset: Anderson returns! Which gives coach Glenn Chapple some difficult selection decisions over which of his bowlers to drop after an excellent performance against Surrey. Somerset are on a roll – two home wins in a row -with a wonderful start to the season for captain Tom Abell. This is their first game away from home. Lancashire wicketkeeper Alex Davies is doubtful. Nottinghamshire v Hampshire: Featuring top-of-the-table Notts, leading wicket-taker Jake Ball and the resurgent Luke Fletcher. A two-day victory against Worcestershire last weekend makes them favourites against a Hampshire side still missing Sam Northeast. Surrey v Worcestershire: Worcestershire have a tricky task at The Oval. They’ve lost their first three games of the season against Hampshire, Somerset and Nottinghamshire. Surrey battled sensibly to salvage a draw at Old Trafford last week. Ollie Pope (237) and Ben Foakes (218) have been particularly prolific with the bat. Division Two Durham v Leicestershire: A bottom of the table clash, with Durham desperate for a game after the washout against Northants last week. Leicester are bordering on respectability after home draws against Sussex and Derbyshire. Glamorgan v Kent: Glamorgan’s first home game of the season at the happily renamed Sophia Gardens. Good times for Glamorgan after a win at Gloucestershire and an impressive bowling performance against Middlesex. Acting Kent captain Joe Denly scored a century in the tour game against Pakistan last week. Sussex v Middlesex: Nick Gubbins returns for Middlesex; Sussex are still without a win after Monday’s downpour ruined the fascinating game against Gloucestershire. In other news, the PCA that accused six (unnamed) counties of paying players below the minimum wage, Steve Smith is back in Australia ready to make amends, little Justin Langer, the man with the eyes of an evangelical preacher, has signed a four-year contract to coach Cricket Australia – and Jos Buttler made fifty in 18 balls for the Rajasthan Royals.
0||Paddy Jackson and Stuart Olding remain in rugby wilderness after acquittalsOn Monday it will be 40 days and nights since Paddy Jackson’s solicitor was asked what the future held for his client and his fellow Ulster team-mate Stuart Olding. The pair had just been acquitted of rape charges after a high-profile court case at Belfast’s high court and, according to his legal representative, Jackson simply wanted “to return to work, getting back on the rugby pitch, representing his province and his country”. Instead both players remain adrift in the sporting wilderness. Jackson, a 26-year-old fly-half, has 25 caps and what appeared a bright future. Olding, a year younger, has four caps as a versatile back and a future that was viewed in similar terms. But this was before a night out in June 2016 that led to both being charged with rape and an eventual trial in which both were found not guilty in March. During the trial a number of WhatsApp messages, involving explicit sexual terminology, were used as evidence and shortly after the trial more than 100 people crowdfunded a newspaper advert to demand the pair never play for Ulster or Ireland again. On 14 April their contracts were revoked by province and country. Now the domestic rugby season is entering its final weeks but Jackson and Olding remain on the sidelines. This week Sale Sharks became the latest club to have second thoughts about offering employment to the two players. To many the grim nature of some of the WhatsApp messages exchanged between the players should disqualify them from any possibility of sympathy. The unsavoury sexual details have been widely broadcast and the stark contrast between the morning-after bragging and the victim’s pain and emotional suffering is no less offensive now. In that context the future of mere sporting careers becomes, at best, relative. None of the other three provinces in Ireland will touch them. One or two clubs in England and France have vaguely considered employing them, only to back off swiftly following an angry backlash from sponsors and fans. Unless the Sharks are lying through their sharp-edged teeth, Jackson’s and Olding’s hopes of making a fresh start in Manchester are set to be dashed, with at least one sponsor advising against signing the pair, the local MP getting involved and an online petition being launched. What might have been a potential bolthole has been abruptly blocked, for now at least. The two internationals, in short, find themselves not a million miles away from the territory occupied by the footballers Ched Evans and Luke McCormick in the recent past. Evans, unanimously cleared of rape in 2016, had sex with a woman in a hotel room following a night out in Rhyl. McCormick, meanwhile, was sentenced to seven years and four months in prison in 2008 for killing two young brothers in a car accident when he was driving at twice the legal drink limit. And now? Both returned to football. Evans is back playing at his original club Sheffield United, having initially had a stint with Chesterfield. McCormick was even appointed captain of his club Plymouth Argyle following spells at Truro City and Oxford United. Both have received fearful stick from opposition supporters but are viewed by the clubs who pay their wages as having been punished enough. Therein lies both the ongoing problem and, potentially, the faintest of lifelines for Jackson and Olding. Rewarding poorly behaved players with another highly paid contract at another team sits awkwardly with many but their supporters would argue they have to earn a crust. No high-profile club wants to be perceived as morally bankrupt but, then again, they are desperate to win every week. Past experience suggests someone, somewhere will eventually invite Jackson and Olding to play for them if the price is right. That inevitably invites two questions: when will that day dawn and who might be their employers? No one can currently supply those answers. Those advising Jackson and Olding may sense that a second-tier club, perhaps the Pro2 in France or the Greene King IPA Championship in England, might yield a softer short-term landing.
13||AFC Wimbledon and MK Dons head in different directions once moreAFC Wimbledon and MK Dons will always live in each other’s shadow, destined forever – or at least for a long while – to be mentioned in the same breath. Both clubs were born of the decision to allow the original Wimbledon FC to be uprooted and moved to Milton Keynes in 2002, since when one has struggled to maintain its status and the other fought to catch them. Two years ago they stood for the first time on the same rung of the footballing ladder, as MK Dons tumbled out of the Championship while Wimbledon came through the League Two play-offs to secure their sixth promotion. Over the last seven days they have been separated once again: last weekend MK Dons lost 2-0 to Scunthorpe and were relegated; on Tuesday Wimbledon drew at Doncaster to guarantee survival. “It’s something that’s built up a lot,” says George Williams, the MK Dons full-back and reigning player of the season (he will reign for another year, as this campaign has been so disappointing the prize has not been handed out). “As a player you’ve just got to get on with your job. We’re disappointed to be relegated and it doesn’t matter who finished above us. It’s not focused on any particular team – we’re disappointed we finished below everyone. We wanted to finish top of the pile.” Erik Samuelson, Wimbledon’s chief executive, sighs when the question is put to him. “We don’t make that comparison,” he says. “It’s the media and, to be fair, fans. My consistent message is we will not have our achievements measured by comparison with anyone else.” Before the season’s final fixture the clubs are separated by four places and 10 points but their campaigns could hardly have been more contrasting. Wimbledon were among the favourites for relegation, constrained by one of the division’s more humble budgets, while the well-funded MK Dons were expected to challenge for promotion; Wimbledon have had the same manager since October 2012, while MK Dons are on their third since the turn of the year. “Robbie Neilson had a really good end to last season and that’s why we all had really high hopes for this year and why we were one of the favourites to go up,” says Williams. “It just never got going like it did last season. There were a lot of changes and for one reason or another it didn’t work out.” Though the club started reasonably, and were mid-table in October, Neilson was sacked in January when they first hit the bottom four. “Dan Micciche came in, which was a bit of a surprise for some people because he didn’t have a lot of experience,” Williams continues. “He did really well with what he had and we started playing really good football. We didn’t get the results but in terms of style of play we’d come on leaps and bounds.” Micciche was sacked last month, having won three of his 16 games in charge. “I want to apologise to our supporters and the city of Milton Keynes,” said the club’s chairman, Pete Winkelman, who admitted to “two bad managerial decisions”. Keith Millen, Micciche’s assistant, has guided them through the remainder of the season but remains a caretaker; Exeter’s Paul Tisdale is current favourite to take permanent charge. The curtain comes down on the Dons’ season at Shrewsbury, who with a comparatively minuscule budget have won more than twice as many points and are preparing for the play-offs. “I think the club, everyone from the players and staff to the fans, are at a real low point right now, one of the lowest points the club’s ever been at,” says Williams. “But you’ve got to face it head on and build an optimism around the place. It’s an opportunity to create something again. It’s a chance to build success here.” Meanwhile at Wimbledon the board and Neal Ardley, the manager, met on Wednesday to discuss their summer plans. “Because of the stability here players recognise they’re not signing for a manager who next week might be gone,” says Samuelson. “When they stop to think about it, that’s important. Players want stability – they also want good money but they want stability – and that is something we can offer.” Their campaign ends at Kingsmeadow with a game against Bury and they hope to have only one further full season there before moving back to their original home borough of Merton. Having received planning permission for a new stadium in December, they expect it to be ready midway through 2019-20. “I regularly say: ‘A football club without ambition, what’s it doing?’ says Samuelson. “When we set up we said our target was to stay in fan ownership, to get into the Football League and to go back home to Merton. We’ve done two of them and we’re on the verge of doing the third. So you start to think, what’s your next target? It was League One and we made it. The next target is the Championship. Let’s get there and see what happens.”
10||NRA convention: six new challenges the powerful gun group is facingTens of thousands of National Rifle Association supporters are gathering in Dallas to browse exhibits of new firearms and equipment, listen to country music and hear conservative politicians line up to pledge their fealty to the gun rights group, led by Donald Trump. But less than three months after the Parkland, Florida, school shooting, the powerful organization is facing a host of new political challenges. 1) A new generation of fierce, media-savvy gun violence prevention advocates The student survivors of the shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school changed the narrative of the gun debate. They used their phones to document the terror the shooting caused even as it was happening, and immediately spoke out, challenging politicians’ inaction and demanding change. Their public rage and grief sparked walkouts and protests at other schools, revealing that a generation of children fed up with school shooting drills as a normal part of their lives, and furious with government inaction. A handful of Parkland teenagers have become international icons of youth protest, including Emma Gonzalez, who now has nearly 1.6 million Twitter followers, more than twice as many as the NRA, and many more teenage survivors of gun violence, from Parkland, Chicago, Washington DC and cities across the country, are jointly campaigning for gun violence prevention. 2) Gun control laws advance at the state level, even in pro-gun states After Parkland, Florida (one of America’s most pro-gun states) passed a set of modest gun control measures, including raising the age to buy rifles and other long guns, despite fierce pushback from one of the NRA’s most powerful lobbyists. Vermont, another pro-gun state, also passed a set of gun control laws, giving advocates a long-fought victory to expand background checks on gun sales. 3) New pushback from corporate America, including financial and tech companies Congressional Republicans have blocked any new federal gun control measures. But Americans’ frustrations with this political stalemate have been channeled into the private sector, with companies from airlines to banks to tech companies to sporting goods stores distancing themselves from the National Rifle Association and its no-compromise policies. 4) A volatile president who has wavered on his support for gun rights The National Rifle Association poured more than $30m into backing Donald Trump’s campaign for president, and he pledged in a speech to NRA members in 2016, “I will not let you down.” After the Parkland shooting, one of Trump’s primary suggestions to prevent violence was arming teachers or other school staff, a strategy the NRA had endorsed after the Sandy Hook elementary school shooting in 2012. But Trump also publicly parted ways with the NRA over his support for raising the age to buy certain guns. Then, in an astonishing public meeting, Trump appeared to voice support for a range of gun control measures, while suggesting that lawmakers should not be afraid of the NRA. “Some of you people are petrified of the NRA. You can’t be petrified,” he said, in remarks that some gun rights advocates saw as a “betrayal”. The NRA’s chief lobbyist met with Trump and Vice-President Mike Pence a day later and tweeted that they “don’t want gun control”. The White House later backed away from endorsing new age limits for gun-buying. 5) Continuing scrutiny over whether the Russian government tried to use the NRA to influence the 2016 election For years, a handful of influential Russian gun rights advocates cultivated a close relationship with the NRA, including hosting prominent NRA supporters in Moscow and donating money to the organization. Now, the group is facing congressional scrutiny, and reported investigations from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Federal Election Commission, over whether a prominent Russian banker “illegally funneled money to the National Rifle Association to help Donald Trump win the presidency”. A gun rights group will be running advertisements in Dallas this year putting a spotlight on questions about the NRA’s ties to Russians. The NRA has said that the money it received from Russians did not go to election spending. 6) After years of booming gun sales under Obama, the firearms industry has struggled under Trump Repeated mass shootings and fears that Barack Obama would sign sweeping gun control legislation helped fuel a boom in the American gun industry. But manufacturers have been faced with what some experts call the “Trump slump” under America’s new gun-friendly president. Remington filed for bankruptcy protection this year, as other famous gun brands also facing tumbling sales.
25||Michael Gove leading plan to ban sale of new hybrid cars by 2040Michael Gove is spearheading plans to halt the sale of new hybrid cars by 2040 to help tackle UK air pollution, Whitehall sources have said. Ministers have been battling privately over whether or not to ban hybrids to strengthen the government’s policy of banning new diesel vehicles in 22 years time. The environment secretary is in favour, as is the business secretary, Greg Clark, but the transport secretary, Chris Grayling, is opposed, the FT reported on Friday. Hybrid car sales dwarf those of fully electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles, but the former emit more pollution because they are still overwhelmingly reliant on burning oil. The proposed hybrid ban is part of a plan called Road to Zero, which is being “heatedly discussed” within government, one source said. A Department for Transport spokesperson said: “It is categorically untrue that government is planning to ban the sale of hybrid cars in the UK by 2040.” A hybrid ban would mean the sale of new cars such as the Toyota Prius would be prohibited after 2040, while 100% electric cars and plug-in hybrids, which have larger batteries and a longer range without using petrol or diesel, could still be sold. The motor industry responded angrily to the news, saying it was disappointed to see policy being communicated by leaks. Mike Hawes, the chief executive of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, said: “Unrealistic targets and misleading messaging on bans will only undermine our efforts to realise this future, confusing consumers and wreaking havoc on the new car market and the thousands of jobs it supports. “We cannot support ambition levels which do not appreciate how industry, the consumer or the market operate and which are based neither on fact nor substance.” When the 2040 ban was announced last summer, shortly after a similar plan by France, the UK government declined to be drawn on whether it covered hybrids. About 98% of new car sales are petrol or diesel, including hybrids. The latter accounted for 72,523 new car registrations in 2017, compared with 13,597 for fully electric models and 33,666 for plug-in hybrids. Prof David Bailey, an automotive expert at Aston university, said the switch to 100% electric cars would only begin to take off in a big way in the 2020s. “We will see a quicker shift into hybrid technology which is set to become the mainstream,” he said.
10||Trump-Russia: judge in Manafort case rebukes Mueller for exceeding authorityA federal judge has rebuked the special counsel investigating alleged collusion between Trump aides and Russia, for overstepping his bounds in a criminal case against the president’s former campaign manager. Robert Mueller last year brought tax and bank fraud charges against Paul Manafort, the first indictment in the Russia investigation. Manafort maintains his innocence. On Friday TS Ellis, a judge in the eastern district of Virginia, suggested that Mueller’s real motivation for pursuing Manafort was to compel him to “sing” against Trump. “You don’t really care about Mr Manafort’s bank fraud,” the judge, reportedly losing his temper, challenged lawyers from the office of special counsel. “You really care about getting information Mr Manafort can give you that would reflect on Mr Trump and lead to his prosecution or impeachment.” The comments, at a tense court hearing in Alexandria, were a boost for Manafort’s lawyers who contend that the charges against him are outside Mueller’s mandate to investigate Russian interference in the 2016 election. Ellis added: “I don’t see what relationship this indictment has with anything the special counsel is authorised to investigate. “We don’t want anyone in this country with unfettered power. It’s unlikely you’re going to persuade me the special prosecutor has power to do anything he or she wants. The American people feel pretty strongly that no one has unfettered power.” Trump seized on the judge’s comments. Addressing a National Rifle Association convention in Dallas, Texas, he brandished a CNN report of the court hearing and read excerpts to the sympathetic audience. The president described Manafort as “a nice guy” who worked for him for “a couple of months” – it was actually five months – as well as for other senior Republicans. Judge Ellis was “something very special”, he said, claiming the questioning of Mueller’s motives demonstrated that the investigation was a “witch-hunt”. Trump added triumphantly: “Let me tell you folks, we’re all fighting battles, but I love fighting these battles.” There were cheers from the audience. Manafort is facing charges in Virginia and Washington DC. The Virginia indictment alleges that he concealed tens of millions of dollars he earned advising pro-Russia politicians in Ukraine from the Internal Revenue Service, before Trump ran for president. The other case accuses him of conspiring to launder money and failing to register as a foreign agent when he lobbied for the pro-Russia Ukrainian government. Manafort has pleaded not guilty to all the charges. Ellis withheld ruling on dismissal of the indictment. He asked the special counsel’s office to share privately with him a copy of deputy attorney general Rod Rosentein’s August 2017 memo elaborating on the scope of Mueller’s Russia investigation. The current version has been heavily redacted, he said. Leaving the White House on his way to Texas on Friday, Trump claimed he would welcome an interview with Mueller. “So I would love to speak,” he told reporters. “I would love to go. Nothing I want to do more, because we did nothing wrong. We ran a great campaign. We won easily.” But he added: “I have to find that we’re going to be treated fairly, because everybody sees it now, and it is a pure witch-hunt. Right now, it’s a pure witch-hunt.”
16||Public asked for view on behaviour code for working in parliamentThe public are to be asked for their views on a behaviour code for those working in parliament drawn up after allegations of bullying and harassment, the group leading the process has said. The cross-party group led by the leader of the Commons, Andrea Leadsom, drafted a report including an initial version of the code, containing seven principles including respecting everyone working at parliament, challenging unacceptable behaviour and seeking a supportive culture. The public will be invited to have their say on the proposals this month, with the final version in place later this year. The working group was put together after a series of allegations of harassment and abuse of staff in parliament late last year. In recent days, allegations of bullying have also been levelled against the Speaker of the Commons, John Bercow, which he has vehemently denied. His former private secretary Angus Sinclair told BBC2’s Newsnight on Tuesday that the Speaker was prone to “over-the-top anger”, adding he was “not sure he was completely in control of it”. Sinclair claimed Bercow had undermined him in front of other staff and once smashed a mobile phone over his desk. Sinclair also alleged that he was paid more than £85,000 when he left his job, in a deal that required him not to speak about his experiences. On Thursday, parliament’s former Black Rod said Bercow’s “intemperate behaviour” was “unworthy of someone in such public office”. David Leakey, who stepped down last year as Black Rod, a ceremonial post in parliament, said he had experienced the outbursts of temper described by other former members of Bercow’s staff. “On one occasion, he quite suddenly erupted in a rage, banging the table and being extremely and personally rude to me, including calling me an antisemite. He did apologise to me for that specific remark afterwards, but not for his other highly personal insults, and it is intolerable,” Leakey told Politics Home. Leadsom said: “Since the publication of the report, we heard further allegations of bullying and mistreatment of the clerks and House of Commons staff. “These are the people who make parliament tick, who support us on select committees and amplify our work as politicians. They deserve courteous and decent treatment at work, but clearly the respect policy available to them has failed to offer them the protection they need.” Leadsom said the aim was “to fundamentally change the culture of Westminster”, adding: “Bringing a centuries-old institution into the modern era would take a great deal of perseverance – and persuasion.”
14||Windrush scandal: no passport for thousands who moved to BritainNew census data shows that about 21,000 people who moved to the UK before 1971 have neither a British passport nor a passport from the country where they were born, giving the strongest picture so far of the possible scale of the Windrush scandal. The data reveals the number of people who may experience difficulty in proving that they are in the UK legally. About 5,200 of the people without passports were born in Caribbean countries, according to the data, suggesting there may be many more non-Windrush people struggling to prove they are not illegal immigrants. Madeleine Sumption, the director of the Migration Observatory at the University of Oxford, said: “The statistics show us that there are large numbers of people who entered the UK under similar policies who are not from the Caribbean. We don’t know from the data whether some people from some countries are more likely to have problems with the absence of documentation, but certainly there is no reason to think that this will be an issue for people exclusively from the Caribbean.” It is not clear why the majority of cases have so far centred on people born in Caribbean countries. This data could indicate that the full extent of the Windrush scandal may eventually spread beyond the large numbers of people affected from Caribbean nations or it might suggest there has been some level of discrimination which has meant that people from Caribbean countries have disproportionately experienced difficulties. The new census data is consistent with previous analysis of Commonwealth migrants living in the UK who arrived before 1971, published by the Migration Observatory, but provides a more accurate count and gives more detailed information about the physical documents people hold. “It shows that 90% of around 600,000 Commonwealth migrants who came to the UK before 1971 and were still resident here in 2011 held a British passport and that 57,000 did not, which is similar to our earlier analysis of the labour force survey,” Sumption said. “Perhaps more importantly though, it shows that about 21,000 pre-1971 Commonwealth migrants did not have any passport at all. This group is likely to be at highest risk of getting into trouble with the immigration enforcement measures that led to the so-called ‘Windrush’ cases. Of course, people without a passport may still be able to demonstrate their legal status with other evidence, such as a naturalisation certificate or another immigration document.” The Home Office said: “While this data shows which people in this cohort did not hold a passport on the day of the census, this does not necessarily mean that they have never held a passport or that their residency status has not been fixed in other ways.”
